 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Charlie and the 

Chocolate Factory 

- Roald Dahl - 

 
 
 

This EBOOK was downloaded from 
www.freewebs.com/aungmyomin  

– August 18th, 2006 
– www.warez-bb.org (Microsoft Reader Format) 

 
Processed 
Source 
Requirement  – Acrobat Reader 6 or later 
 
This ebook was originally in Microsoft Reader Format and since I thought it isn’t very convenient 
to read books in that nasty program, I took my time to convert it to PDF format. Now, the 2nd Roald 
Dahl book was finally posted on my website! I’m working hard to upload the second series of this book 
– Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator. Although I haven’t read it yet, I’m sure it will be as interesting 
as this one.  
 
I regret to say that original photos (I’ve seen them in the book I hired from the British Council 
Library) cannot be put into this EBOOK because I don’t have a scanner. It will add more excitement to 
this book if the pictures were present. You can look for the complete version of the book on Puffin 
Books – it’s got numerous funny pictures and costs about 6 pounds according to the price label on the 
back. 
I hope you enjoyed reading this book. You can always look for more EBOOKS at my website if 
 
you want something useful to read. I’ll try to add more and more books if the connection speed and 
time allow me. Thank you. 
 

Aung Myo Min, 
August 18th, 2006. 

Charlie and the Chocolate Factory 

- by Roald Dahl  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ROALD DAHL  
 

Roald Dahl was born in 1916 in Wales of Norwegian parents. He was educated in England 
before starting work for the Shell Oil Company in Africa. He began writing after a 'monumental 
bash on the head' sustained as an RAF fighter pilot during the Second World War. Roald Dahl is 
one of the most successful and well-known of all children's writers. His books, which are read by 
children the world over, include James and the Giant Peach, Charlie and the Chocolate Factory, 
The Magic Finger, Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator, Fantastic Mr Fox, Matilda, The Twits, The 
BFG and The Witches, winner of the 1983 Whitbread Award. Roald Dahl died in 1990 at the age of 
seventy-four. 

Roald  Dahl  found  Charlie  and  the  Chocolate  Factory  one  of  the  most  difficult  books  to 
write. His first draft of the story included fifteen horrible children. His nephew Nicholas read it 
and said it was rotten and boring, so Dahl realized he needed to rewrite it! 

The  idea  for  Charlie  came  from  Roald  Dahl’s  schooldays,  when  he  and  other  classmates 
were occasionally asked by Cadbury’s to test newly invented chocolate bars. He used to dream of 
inventing his own famous chocolate bar that would win the praise of Mr Cadbury himself. 

 
This was Dahl’s motto that he lived by: 
 
My candle burns at both ends 
It will not last the night 
But ah my foes and oh my friends 
It gives a lovely light 
 
For a closer look at the world of Roald Dahl, visit the website at – www.roalddahl.com  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

There are five children in this book: 
  
AUGUSTUS GLOOP 
A greedy boy 
  
VERUCA SALT 
A girl who is spoiled by her parents 
  
VIOLET BEAUREGARDE 
A girl who chews gum all day long 
  
MIKE TEAVEE 
A boy who does nothing but watch television 
  
and 
  
CHARLIE BUCKET 
The hero 
 
 
1 - Here Comes Charlie 

Grandpa Joe and Grandma Josephine on this side, Grandpa George and Grandma Georgina 

Mr and Mrs Bucket and little Charlie Bucket slept in the other room, upon mattresses on the 

In  the  summertime,  this  wasn't  too  bad,  but  in  the  winter,  freezing  cold  draughts  blew 

There wasn't any question of them being able to buy a better house — or even one more 

 
These  two  very  old  people  are  the  father  and  mother  of  Mr  Bucket.  Their  names  are 

The whole of this family — the six grown-ups (count them) and little Charlie Bucket — live 

And these two very old people are the father and mother of Mrs Bucket. Their names are 

This is Mr Bucket. This is Mrs Bucket. 
Mr and Mrs Bucket have a small boy whose name is Charlie. 
This is Charlie. 
How d'you do? And how d'you do? And how d'you do again? He is pleased to meet you. 

Grandpa Joe and Grandma Josephine. 
 
Grandpa George and Grandma Georgina. 
  
  
  
  
  
  
together in a small wooden house on the edge of a great town. 
  
The  house  wasn't  nearly  large  enough  for  so  many  people,  and  life  was  extremely 
uncomfortable for them all. There were only two rooms in the place altogether, and there was only 
one bed. The bed was given to the four old grandparents because they were so old and tired. They 
were so tired, they never got out of it. 
  
on this side. 
  
floor. 
  
across the floor all night long, and it was awful. 
  
bed to sleep in. They were far too poor for that. 
  
Mr Bucket was the only person in the family with a job. He worked in a toothpaste factory, 
where  he  sat  all  day  long  at  a  bench  and  screwed  the  little  caps  on  to  the  tops  of  the  tubes  of 
toothpaste after the tubes had been filled. But a toothpaste cap-screwer is never paid very much 
money, and poor Mr Bucket, however hard he worked, and however fast he screwed on the caps, 
was never able to make enough to buy one half of the things that so large a family needed. There 
wasn't  even  enough  money  to  buy  proper  food  for  them  all.  The  only  meals  they  could  afford 
were bread and margarine for breakfast, boiled potatoes and cabbage for lunch, and cabbage soup 

for supper. Sundays were a bit better. They all looked forward to Sundays because then, although 
they had exactly the same, everyone was allowed a second helping. 
The Buckets, of course, didn't starve, but every one of them — the two old grandfathers, the two 
old grandmothers, Charlie's father, Charlie's mother, and especially little Charlie himself — went 
about from morning till night with a horrible empty feeling in their tummies. 
  
  
Charlie felt it worst of all. And although  his  father  and  mother  often  went  without  their 
own share of lunch or supper so that they could give it to him, it still wasn't nearly enough for a 
growing  boy.  He  desperately  wanted  something  more  filling  and  satisfying  than  cabbage  and 
cabbage soup. The one thing he longed for more than anything else was . . . CHOCOLATE. 
   
Walking to school in the mornings, Charlie could see great slabs of chocolate piled up high 
in the shop windows, and he would stop and stare and press his nose against the glass, his mouth 
watering like mad. Many times a day, he would see other children taking bars of creamy chocolate 
out of their pockets and munching them greedily, and that, of course, was pure torture. 
   
Only once a year, on his birthday, did Charlie Bucket ever get to taste a bit of chocolate. The 
whole  family  saved  up  their  money  for  that  special  occasion,  and  when  the  great  day  arrived, 
Charlie was always presented with one small chocolate bar to eat all by himself. And each time he 
received it, on those marvellous birthday mornings, he would place it carefully in a small wooden 
box that he owned, and treasure it as though it were a bar of solid gold; and for the next few days, 
he would allow himself only to look at it, but never to touch it. Then at last, when he could stand it 
no longer, he would peel back a tiny bit of the paper wrapping at one corner to expose a tiny bit of 
chocolate, and then he would take a tiny nibble — just enough to allow the lovely sweet taste to 
spread out slowly over his tongue. The next day, he would take another tiny nibble, and so on, 
and so on. And in this way, Charlie would make his sixpenny bar of birthday chocolate last him 
for more than a month. 
   
But I haven't yet told you about the one awful thing that tortured little Charlie, the lover of 
chocolate,  more  than  anything  else.  This  thing,  for  him,  was  far,  far  worse  than  seeing  slabs  of 
chocolate  in  the  shop  windows  or  watching  other  children  munching  bars  of  creamy  chocolate 
right in front of him. It was the most terrible torturing thing you could imagine, and it was this: 
   
ENORMOUS CHOCOLATE FACTORY! 
  
Just imagine that! 
  
  
And it wasn't simply an ordinary enormous chocolate factory, either. It was the largest and 
most famous in the whole world! It was WONKA'S FACTORY, owned by a man called Mr Willy 
Wonka,  the  greatest  inventor  and  maker  of  chocolates  that  there  has  ever  been.  And  what  a 
tremendous,  marvellous  place  it  was!  It  had  huge  iron  gates  leading  into  it,  and  a  high  wall 
surrounding it, and smoke belching from its chimneys, and strange whizzing sounds coming from 
deep inside it. And outside the walls, for half a mile around in every direction, the air was scented 
with the heavy rich smell of melting chocolate! 
   
Twice a day, on his way to and from school, little Charlie Bucket had to walk right past the 
gates of the factory. And every time he went by, he would begin to walk very, very slowly, and he 
would hold his nose high in the air and take long deep sniffs of the gorgeous chocolatey smell all 
around him. 
  
  
  
  

Oh, how he loved that smell! 
And oh, how he wished he could go inside the factory and see what it was like! 

In the town itself, actually within sight of the house in which Charlie lived, there was an 

2 
Mr Willy Wonka's Factory 
 

One evening, when Charlie went in to see his grandparents, he said to them, 'Is it really 

The other three old people nodded their heads slowly up and down, and said, 'Absolutely 

And Grandpa Joe said, 'You mean to say I've never told you about Mr Willy Wonka and his 

'True?' cried all four of them at once. 'Of course it's true! Good heavens, didn't you know 

In the evenings, after he had finished his supper of watery cabbage soup, Charlie always 
went into the room of his four grandparents to listen to their stories, and then afterwards to say 
good night. 
  
Every one of these old people was over ninety. They were as shrivelled as prunes, and as 
bony as skeletons, and throughout the day, until Charlie made his appearance, they lay huddled 
in their one bed, two at either end, with nightcaps on to keep their heads warm, dozing the time 
away with nothing to do. But as soon as they heard the door opening, and heard Charlie's voice 
saying, 'Good evening, Grandpa Joe and Grandma Josephine, and Grandpa George and Grandma 
Georgina,' then all four of them would suddenly sit up, and their old wrinkled faces would light 
up with smiles of pleasure — and the talking would begin. For they loved this little boy. He was 
the  only  bright  thing  in  their  lives,  and  his  evening  visits  were  something  that  they  looked 
forward to all day long. Often, Charlie's mother and father would come in as well, and stand by 
the door, listening to the stories that the old people told; and thus, for perhaps half an hour every 
night,  this  room  would  become  a  happy  place,  and  the  whole  family  would  forget  that  it  was 
hungry and poor. 
   
true that Wonka's Chocolate Factory is the biggest in the world?' 
   
that? It's about fifty times as big as any other!' 
  
'And is Mr Willy Wonka really the cleverest chocolate maker in the world?' 
  
'My dear boy,' said Grandpa Joe, raising himself up a little higher on his pillow, 'Mr Willy 
Wonka is the most amazing, the most fantastic, the most extraordinary chocolate maker the world 
has ever seen! I thought everybody knew that!' 
  
   
make anything — anything he wants! Isn't that a fact, my dears?' 
  
true. Just as true as can be.' 
   
factory?' 
'Never,' answered little Charlie. 
  
'Good heavens above! I don't know what's the matter with me!' 
   
'Will you tell me now, Grandpa Joe, please?' 
  
'I certainly will. Sit down beside me on the bed, my dear, and listen carefully.' 
   
  
Grandpa Joe was the oldest of the four grandparents. He was ninety-six and a half, and that 
is just about as old as anybody can be. Like all extremely old people, he was delicate and weak, 
and  throughout  the  day  he  spoke  very  little.  But  in  the  evenings,  when  Charlie,  his  beloved 
grandson, was in the room, he seemed in some marvellous way to grow quite young again. All his 
tiredness fell away from him, and he became as eager and excited as a young boy. 
  
'Oh,  what  a  man  he  is,  this  Mr  Willy  Wonka!'  cried  Grandpa  Joe.  'Did  you  know,  for 
example, that he has himself invented more than two hundred new kinds of chocolate bars, each 
with a different centre, each far sweeter and creamier and more delicious than anything the other 
chocolate factories can make!' 
   
earth! Isn't that so, Grandpa Joe?' 
  
'It is, my dear, it is. And to all the kings and presidents of the world as well. But it isn't only 
chocolate  bars  that  he  makes.  Oh,  dear  me,  no!  He  has  some  really  fantastic  inventions  up  his 
sleeve,  Mr  Willy  Wonka  has!  Did  you  know  that  he's  invented  a  way  of  making  chocolate  ice 

'I knew he was famous, Grandpa Joe, and I knew he was very clever . . .' 
'Clever!' cried the old man. 'He's more than that! He's a magician with chocolate! He can 

'Perfectly true!' cried Grandma Josephine. 'And he sends them to all the four corners of the 

'But that's impossible!' said little Charlie, staring at his grandfather. 
'Of course it's impossible!' cried Grandpa Joe. 'It's completely absurd! But Mr Willy Wonka 

cream so that it stays cold for hours and hours without being in the refrigerator? You can even 
leave it lying in the sun all morning on a hot day and it won't go runny!' 
  
  
has done it!' 
   
'Quite right!' the others agreed, nodding their heads. 'Mr Wonka has done it.' 
  
'And then again,' Grandpa Joe went on speaking very slowly now so that Charlie wouldn't 
miss a word, 'Mr Willy Wonka can make marshmallows that taste of violets, and rich caramels 
that change colour every ten seconds as you suck them, and little feathery sweets that melt away 
deliciously the moment you put them between your lips. He can make chewing-gum that never 
loses its taste, and sugar balloons that you can blow up to enormous sizes before you pop them 
with a pin and gobble them up. And, by a most secret method, he can make lovely blue birds' eggs 
with black spots on them, and when you put one of these in your mouth, it gradually gets smaller 
and smaller until suddenly there is nothing left except a tiny little pink sugary baby bird sitting on 
the tip of your tongue.' 
   
mouth water just thinking about it,' he said. 
   
  
into the room, and now both were standing just inside the door, listening. 
  
that.' 
   
  
   
  
   
  
3 
Mr Wonka and the Indian Prince 
 

'You mean Prince Pondicherry?' said Grandpa Joe, and he began chuckling with laughter. 
'Completely dotty!' said Grandpa George. 
'But very rich,' said Grandma Georgina. 
'What did he do?' asked Charlie eagerly. 
'Listen,' said Grandpa Joe, 'and I'll tell you.' 

'Mine, too,' said little Charlie. 'But please go on.' 
While they were talking, Mr and Mrs Bucket, Charlie's mother and father, had come quietly 

'Tell  Charlie  about  that  crazy  Indian  prince,'  said  Grandma  Josephine.  'He'd  like  to  hear 

Grandpa  Joe  paused  and  ran  the  point  of  his  tongue  slowly  over  his  lips.  'It  makes  my 

'Prince Pondicherry wrote a letter to Mr Willy Wonka,' said Grandpa Joe, 'and asked him to 

'When it was all finished, Mr Wonka said to Prince Pondicherry, "I warn you, though, it 

come all the way out to India and build him a colossal palace entirely out of chocolate.' 
'Did Mr Wonka do it, Grandpa?' 
  
  
'He did, indeed. And what a palace it was! It had one hundred rooms, and everything was 
made of either dark or light chocolate! The bricks were chocolate, and the cement holding them 
together was chocolate, and the windows were chocolate, and all the walls and ceilings were made 
of chocolate, so were the carpets and the pictures and the furniture and the beds; and when you 
turned on the taps in the bathroom, hot chocolate came pouring out. 
  
won't last very long, so you'd better start eating it right away." 
  
nibble the staircase or lick the walls! I'm going to live in it!" 
   
'But Mr Wonka was right, of course, because soon after this, there came a very hot day with 
a boiling sun, and the whole palace began to melt, and then it sank slowly to the ground, and the 
crazy prince, who was dozing in the living room at the time, woke up to find himself swimming 
around in a huge brown sticky lake of chocolate.' 
  
Little Charlie sat very still on the edge of the bed, staring at his grandfather. Charlie's face 
was bright, and his eyes were stretched so wide you could see the whites all around. 'Is all this 
really true?' he asked. 'Or are you pulling my leg?' 
  

"Nonsense!"  shouted  the  Prince.  "I'm  not  going  to  eat  my  palace!  I'm  not  even  going  to 

'It's true!' cried all four of the old people at once. 'Of course it's true! Ask anyone you like!' 

'And I'll tell you something else that's true,' said Grandpa Joe, and now he leaned closer to 

  
Charlie, and lowered his voice to a soft, secret whisper. 'Nobody . . . ever . . . comes . . . out!' 

  

'Out of where?' asked Charlie. 
'And . . . nobody . . . ever . . . goes . . . in!' 
'In where?' cried Charlie. 
  
'Wonka's factory, of course!' 
  
'Grandpa, what do you mean?' 
  
'I mean workers, Charlie.' 
  
'Workers?' 
  
'All  factories,'  said  Grandpa  Joe,  'have  workers  streaming  in  and  out  of  the  gates  in  the 
mornings and evenings — except Wonka's! Have you ever seen a single person going into that 
place — or coming out?' 
Little Charlie looked slowly around at each of the four old faces, one after the other, and 
  
they all looked back at him. They were friendly smiling faces, but they were also quite serious. 
There was no sign of joking or leg-pulling on any of them. 
  
  
the gates seem to be closed.' 
  

'Well? Have you?' asked Grandpa Joe. 
'I . . . I really don't know, Grandpa,' Charlie stammered. 'Whenever I walk past the factory, 

'Exactly!' said Grandpa Joe. 
'But there must be people working there . . .' 
'Not people, Charlie. Not ordinary people, anyway.' 
'Then who?' cried Charlie. 
'Ah-ha . . . That's it, you see . . . That's another of Mr Willy Wonka's clevernesses.' 
'Charlie, dear,' Mrs Bucket called out from where she was standing by the door, 'it's time for 

'But, Mother, I must hear . . .' 
'Tomorrow, my darling . . .' 
'That's right,' said Grandpa Joe, 'I'll tell you the rest of it tomorrow evening.' 

  
  
  
  
bed. That's enough for tonight.' 
  
  
  
  
  
4 
The Secret Workers 
 

The next evening, Grandpa Joe went on with his story. 
  
'You  see,  Charlie,'  he  said,  'not  so  very  long  ago  there  used  to  be  thousands  of  people 
working in Mr Willy Wonka's factory. Then one day, all of a sudden, Mr Wonka had to ask every 
single one of them to leave, to go home, never to come back.' 
'But why?' asked Charlie. 
  
'Because of spies.' 
  
'Spies?' 
  
  
'Yes. All the other chocolate makers, you see, had begun to grow jealous of the wonderful 
sweets that Mr Wonka was making, and they started sending in spies to steal his secret recipes. 
The spies took jobs in the Wonka factory, pretending that they were ordinary workers, and while 
they were there, each one of them found out exactly how a certain special thing was made.' 
'And did they go back to their own factories and tell?' asked Charlie. 
  
  
'They  must  have,'  answered  Grandpa  Joe,  'because  soon  after  that,  Fickelgruber's  factory 
started making an ice cream that would never melt, even in the hottest sun. Then Mr Prodnose's 
factory came out with a chewing-gum that never lost its flavour however much you chewed it. 
And then Mr Slugworth's factory began making sugar balloons that you could blow up to huge 
sizes before you popped them with a pin and gobbled them up. And so on, and so on. And Mr 

Willy  Wonka  tore  his  beard  and  shouted,  "This  is  terrible!  I  shall  be  ruined!  There  are  spies 
everywhere! I shall have to close the factory!"' 

'But  no!  The  great  iron  gates  were  still  locked  and  chained  as  securely  as  ever,  and  Mr 

'"But  the  factory  is  working!"  the  people  shouted.  "Listen!  You  can  hear  the  machines! 

'But he didn't do that!' Charlie said. 
  
'Oh, yes he did. He told all the workers that he was sorry, but they would have to go home. 
Then,  he  shut  the  main  gates  and  fastened  them  with  a  chain.  And  suddenly,  Wonka's  giant 
chocolate  factory  became  silent  and  deserted.  The  chimneys  stopped  smoking,  the  machines 
stopped whirring, and from then on, not a single chocolate or sweet was made. Not a soul went in 
or out, and even Mr Willy Wonka himself disappeared completely. 
  
'Months and months went by,' Grandpa Joe went on, 'but still the factory remained closed. 
And everybody said, "Poor Mr Wonka. He was so nice. And he made such marvellous things. But 
he's finished now. It's all over." 
  
'Then  something  astonishing  happened.  One  day,  early  in  the  morning,  thin  columns  of 
white smoke were seen to be coming out of the tops of the tall chimneys of the factory! People in 
the  town  stopped  and  stared.  "What's  going  on?"  they  cried.  "Someone's  lit  the  furnaces!  Mr 
Wonka must be opening up again!" They ran to the gates, expecting to see them wide open and 
Mr Wonka standing there to welcome his workers back. 
  
Wonka was nowhere to be seen. 
  
They're all whirring again! And you can smell the smell of melting chocolate in the air!"' 
  
Grandpa  Joe  leaned  forward  and  laid  a  long  bony  finger  on  Charlie's  knee,  and  he  said 
softly, 'But most mysterious of all, Charlie, were the shadows in the windows of the factory. The 
people  standing  on  the  street  outside  could  see  small  dark  shadows  moving  about  behind  the 
frosted glass windows.' 
  
  
  
locked! It's crazy! Nobody ever comes out, either!" 
  
'But there was no question at all,' said Grandpa Joe, 'that the factory was running. And it's 
gone on running ever since, for these last ten years. What's more, the chocolates and sweets it's 
been turning out have become more fantastic and delicious all the time. And of course now when 
Mr Wonka invents some new and wonderful sweet, neither Mr Fickelgruber nor Mr Prodnose nor 
Mr Slugworth nor anybody else is able to copy it. No spies can go into the factory to find out how 
it is made.' 
  
factory?' 

'Shadows of whom?' said Charlie quickly. 
'That's exactly what everybody else wanted to know. 
'"The  place  is  full  of  workers!"  the  people  shouted.  "But  nobody's  gone  in!  The  gates  are 

'But  Grandpa,  who,'  cried  Charlie,  'who  is  Mr  Wonka  using  to  do  all  the  work  in  the 

'Nobody knows, Charlie.' 
'But that's absurd! Hasn't someone asked Mr Wonka?' 
  
  
'Nobody  sees  him  any  more.  He  never  comes  out. The only things that come out of that 
place are chocolates and sweets. They come out through a special trap door in the wall, all packed 
and addressed, and they are picked up every day by Post Office trucks.' 
'But Grandpa, what sort of people are they that work in there?' 
  
'My dear boy,' said Grandpa Joe, 'that is one of the great mysteries of the chocolate-making 
  
world.  We  know  only  one  thing  about  them.  They  are  very  small.  The  faint  shadows  that 
sometimes appear behind the windows, especially late at night when the lights are on, are those of 
tiny people, people no taller than my knee . . .' 
'There aren't any such people,' Charlie said. 
  
  
Just  then,  Mr  Bucket,  Charlie's  father,  came  into  the  room.  He  was  home  from  the 
toothpaste factory, and he was waving an evening newspaper rather excitedly. 'Have you heard 
the news?' he cried. He held up the paper so that they could see the huge headline. The headline 
said: 

WONKA FACTORY TO BE OPENED AT LAST TO LUCKY FEW 

 

 
  
5 
The Golden Tickets 
 

'You mean people are actually going to be allowed to go inside the factory?' cried Grandpa 

Joe. 'Read us what it says — quickly!' 
  
 

'All right,' said Mr Bucket, smoothing out the newspaper. 'Listen.' 

EVENING BULLETIN 

  

 

 Mr Willy Wonka, the confectionery genius whom nobody has seen for the last ten years, sent 

out the following notice today: 
  
I, Willy Wonka, have decided to allow five children — just five, mind you, and no more — 
  
to visit my factory this year. These lucky five will be shown around personally by me, and they 
will be allowed to see all the secrets and the magic of my factory. Then, at the end of the tour, 
as a special present, all of them will be given enough chocolates and sweets to last them for 
the  rest  of  their  lives!  So  watch  out  for  the  Golden  Tickets!  Five  Golden  Tickets  have  been 
printed  on  golden  paper,  and  these  five  Golden  Tickets  have  been  hidden  underneath  the 
ordinary wrapping paper of five ordinary bars of chocolate. These five chocolate bars may be 
anywhere — in any shop in any street in any town in any country in the world — upon any 
counter where Wonka's Sweets are sold. And the five lucky finders of these five Golden Tickets 
are the only ones who will be allowed to visit my factory and see what it's like now inside! Good 
luck to you all, and happy hunting! (Signed Willy Wonka.) 
  
  
'The man's dotty!' muttered Grandma Josephine. 
  
'He's brilliant!' cried Grandpa Joe. 'He's a magician! Just imagine what will happen now! 
The whole world will be searching for those Golden Tickets! Everyone will be buying Wonka's 
chocolate  bars  in  the  hope  of  finding  one!  He'll  sell  more  than  ever  before!  Oh,  how  exciting  it 
would be to find one!' 
  
Grandpa George. 'Just imagine that!' 
  
  
  
chocolate and see a Golden Ticket glistening inside!' 

'They'd have to deliver them in a truck!' said Grandma Georgina. 
'It makes me quite ill to think of it,' said Grandma Josephine. 
'Nonsense!'  cried  Grandpa  Joe.  'Wouldn't  it  be  something,  Charlie,  to  open  a  bar  of 

'And all the chocolate and sweets that you could eat for the rest of your life — free!' said 

'It certainly would, Grandpa. But there isn't a hope,' Charlie said sadly. 'I only get one bar a 

'You never know, darling,' said Grandma Georgina. 'It's your birthday next week. You have 

year.' 
  
as much chance as anybody else.' 
  
'I'm afraid that simply isn't true,' said Grandpa George. 'The kids who are going to find the 
Golden Tickets are the ones who can afford to buy bars of chocolate every day. Our Charlie gets 
only one a year. There isn't a hope.' 
  
  
 

6 
The First Two Finders 
 

The very next day, the first Golden Ticket was found. The finder was a boy called Augustus 
Gloop, and Mr Bucket's evening newspaper carried a large picture of him on the front page. The 
picture showed a nine-year-old boy who was so enormously fat he looked as though he had been 
blown up with a powerful pump. Great flabby folds of fat bulged out from every part of his body, 
and his face was like a monstrous ball of dough with two small greedy curranty eyes peering out 
upon the world. The town in which Augustus Gloop lived, the newspaper said, had gone wild 
with excitement over their hero. Flags were flying from all the windows, children had been given 
a holiday from school, and a parade was being organized in honour of the famous youth. 

'I just knew Augustus would find a Golden Ticket,' his mother had told the newspapermen. 
'He eats so many bars of chocolate a day that it was almost impossible for him not to find one. 
Eating  is  his  hobby,  you  know.  That's  all  he's  interested  in.  But  still,  that's  better  than  being  a 
hooligan  and  shooting  off  zip  guns  and  things  like  that  in  his  spare  time,  isn't  it?  And  what  I 
always say is, he wouldn't go on eating like he does unless he needed nourishment, would he? It's 
all vitamins, anyway. What a thrill it will be for him to visit Mr Wonka's marvellous factory! We're 
just as proud as anything!' 
'What a revolting woman,' said Grandma Josephine. 
  
'And what a repulsive boy,' said Grandma Georgina. 
  
'Only four Golden Tickets left,' said Grandpa George. 'I wonder who'll get those.' 
  
  
And now the whole country, indeed, the whole world, seemed suddenly to be caught up in 
a  mad  chocolate-buying  spree,  everybody  searching  frantically  for  those  precious  remaining 
tickets. Fully grown women were seen going into sweet shops and buying ten Wonka bars at a 
time,  then  tearing  off  the  wrappers  on  the  spot  and  peering  eagerly  underneath  for  a  glint  of 
golden paper. Children were taking hammers and smashing their piggy banks and running out to 
the shops with handfuls of money. In one city, a famous gangster robbed a bank of a thousand 
pounds and spent the whole lot on Wonka bars that same afternoon. And when the police entered 
his house to arrest him, they found him sitting on the floor amidst mountains of chocolate, ripping 
off  the  wrappers  with  the  blade  of  a  long  dagger.  In  far-off  Russia,  a  woman  called  Charlotte 
Russe claimed to have found the second ticket, but it turned out to be a clever fake. The famous 
English scientist, Professor Foulbody, invented a machine which would tell you at once, without 
opening  the  wrapper  of  a  bar  of  chocolate,  whether  or  not  there  was  a  Golden  Ticket  hidden 
underneath  it.  The  machine  had  a  mechanical  arm  that  shot  out  with  tremendous  force  and 
grabbed hold of anything that had the slightest bit of gold inside it, and for a moment, it looked 
like the answer to everything. But unfortunately, while the Professor was showing off the machine 
to the public at the sweet counter of a large department store, the mechanical arm shot out and 
made a grab for the gold filling in the back tooth of a duchess who was standing near by. There 
was an ugly scene, and the machine was smashed by the crowd. 
Suddenly, on the day before Charlie Bucket's birthday, the newspapers announced that the 
  
second Golden Ticket had been found. The lucky person was a small girl called Veruca Salt who 
lived with her rich parents in a great city far away. Once again Mr Bucket's evening newspaper 
carried a big picture of the finder. She was sitting between her beaming father and mother in the 
living room of their house, waving the Golden Ticket above her head, and grinning from ear to 
ear. 
  
Veruca's father, Mr Salt, had eagerly explained to the newspapermen exactly how the ticket 
was found. 'You see, boys,' he had said, 'as soon as my little girl told me that she simply had to 
have one of those Golden Tickets, I went out into the town and started buying up all the Wonka 
bars I could lay my hands on. Thousands of them, I must have bought. Hundreds of thousands! 
Then  I  had  them  loaded  on  to  trucks  and  sent  directly  to  my  own  factory.  I'm  in  the  peanut 
business, you see, and I've got about a hundred women working for me over at my place, shelling 

'Come to bed, my darling,' said Charlie's mother. 'Tomorrow's your birthday, don't forget 

'A Wonka chocolate bar!' cried Charlie. 'It is a Wonka bar, isn't it?' 
'Yes, my love,' his mother said. 'Of course it is.' 
'Oh, wouldn't it be wonderful if I found the third Golden Ticket inside it?' Charlie said. 
'Bring it in here when you get it,' Grandpa Joe said. 'Then we can all watch you taking off 

  
  
that, Charlie, you mark my words.' 
  
that, so I expect you'll be up early to open your present.' 
  
  
  
  
the wrapper.' 
  
7 
Charlie's Birthday 
 

peanuts  for  roasting  and  salting. That's  what  they  do  all  day  long,  those  women,  they  sit  there 
shelling  peanuts.  So  I  says  to  them,  "Okay,  girls,"  I  says,  "from  now  on,  you  can  stop  shelling 
peanuts  and  start  shelling  the  wrappers  off  these  chocolate  bars  instead!"  And  they  did.  I  had 
every  worker  in  the  place  yanking  the  paper  off  those  bars  of  chocolate  full  speed  ahead  from 
morning till night. 
  
'But three days went by, and we had no luck. Oh, it was terrible! My little Veruca got more 
and  more  upset  each  day,  and  every  time  I  went  home  she  would  scream  at  me,  "Where's  my 
Golden Ticket! I want my Golden Ticket!" And she would lie for hours on the floor, kicking and 
yelling in the most disturbing way. Well, I just hated to see my little girl feeling unhappy like that, 
so I vowed I would keep up the search until I'd got her what she wanted. Then suddenly . . . on 
the evening of the fourth day, one of my women workers yelled, "I've got it! A Golden Ticket!" 
And I said, "Give it to me, quick!" and she did, and I rushed it home and gave it to my darling 
Veruca, and now she's all smiles, and we have a happy home once again.' 
  

'That's even worse than the fat boy,' said Grandma Josephine. 
'She needs a really good spanking,' said Grandma Georgina. 
'I don't think the girl's father played it quite fair, Grandpa, do you?' Charlie murmured. 
'He spoils her,' Grandpa Joe said. 'And no good can ever come from spoiling a child like 

'Happy birthday!' cried the four old grandparents, as Charlie came into their room early the 

The four old people, two at either end of the bed, propped themselves up on their pillows 

next morning. 
  
Charlie smiled nervously and sat down on the edge of the bed. He was holding his present, 
his  only  present,  very  carefully  in  his  two  hands.  WONKA'S  WHIPPLE-SCRUMPTIOUS 
FUDGEMALLOW DELIGHT, it said on the wrapper. 
  
and stared with anxious eyes at the bar of chocolate in Charlie's hands. 
Mr and Mrs Bucket came in and stood at the foot of the bed, watching Charlie. 
  
  
The  room  became  silent.  Everybody  was  waiting  now  for  Charlie  to  start  opening  his 
present.  Charlie  looked  down  at  the  bar  of  chocolate.  He  ran  his  fingers  slowly  back  and  forth 
along the length of it, stroking it lovingly, and the shiny paper wrapper made little sharp crackly 
noises in the quiet room. 
  
Then Mrs Bucket said gently, 'You mustn't be too disappointed, my darling, if you don't 
find what you're looking for underneath that wrapper. You really can't expect to be as lucky as all 
that.' 
  
  

'She's quite right,' Mr Bucket said. 
Charlie didn't say anything. 
'After all,' Grandma Josephine said, 'in the whole wide world there are only three tickets 

left to be found.' 
  
have the bar of chocolate.' 
  

'The  thing  to  remember,'  Grandma  Georgina  said,  'is  that  whatever  happens,  you'll  still 

'Wonka's Whipple-Scrumptious Fudgemallow Delight!' cried Grandpa George. 'It's the best 

'Yes,' Charlie whispered. 'I know.' 
'Just forget all about those Golden Tickets and enjoy the chocolate,' Grandpa Joe said. 'Why 

The chance had to be there. 
This particular bar of chocolate had as much chance as any other of having a Golden Ticket. 
And that was why all the grandparents and parents in the room were actually just as tense 

of them all! You'll just love it!' 
  
  
don't you do that?' 
  
They  all  knew  it  was  ridiculous  to  expect  this  one  poor  little  bar  of  chocolate  to  have  a 
magic  ticket  inside  it,  and  they  were  trying  as  gently  and  as  kindly  as  they  could  to  prepare 
Charlie for the disappointment. But there was one other thing that the grown-ups also knew, and 
it was this: that however small the chance might be of striking lucky, the chance was there. 
  
  
  
and excited as Charlie was, although they were pretending to be very calm. 
'You'd better go ahead and open it up, or you'll be late for school,' Grandpa Joe said. 
  
'You might as well get it over with,' Grandpa George said. 
  
'Open it, my dear,' Grandma Georgina said. 'Please open it. You're making me jumpy.' 
  
Very slowly, Charlie's fingers began to tear open one small corner of the wrapping paper. 
  
The old people in the bed all leaned forward, craning their scraggy necks. 
  
  
Then  suddenly,  as  though  he  couldn't  bear  the  suspense  any  longer,  Charlie  tore  the 
wrapper right down the middle . . . and on to his lap, there fell . . . a light-brown creamy-coloured 
bar of chocolate. 
There was no sign of a Golden Ticket anywhere. 
  
'Well — that's that!' said Grandpa Joe brightly. 'It's just what we expected.' 
  
Charlie looked up. Four kind old faces were watching him intently from the bed. He smiled 
  
at them, a small sad smile, and then he shrugged his shoulders and picked up the chocolate bar 
and held it out to his mother, and said, 'Here, Mother, have a bit. We'll share it. I want everybody 
to taste it.' 
  
  
  
  
  
skinny shoulders. 'Come on, or you'll be late.' 
  
8 
Two More Golden Tickets Found 

'Certainly not!' his mother said. 
And the others all cried, 'No, no! We wouldn't dream of it! It's all yours!' 
'Please,' begged Charlie, turning round and offering it to Grandpa Joe. 
But neither he nor anyone else would take even a tiny bit. 
'It's  time  to  go  to  school,  my  darling,'  Mrs  Bucket  said,  putting  an  arm  around  Charlie's 

 
That evening, Mr Bucket's newspaper announced the finding of not only the third Golden 
Ticket, but the fourth as well. TWO GOLDEN TICKETS FOUND TODAY, screamed the headlines. 
ONLY ONE MORE LEFT. 
  
after supper, 'let's hear who found them.' 

'All right,' said Grandpa Joe, when the whole family was gathered in the old people's room 

'The third ticket,' read Mr Bucket, holding the newspaper up close to his face because his 
eyes  were  bad  and  he  couldn't  afford  glasses,  'the  third  ticket  was  found  by  a  Miss  Violet 
Beauregarde.  There  was  great  excitement  in  the  Beauregarde  household  when  our  reporter 
arrived to interview the lucky young lady — cameras were clicking and flashbulbs were flashing 
and people were pushing and jostling and trying to get a bit closer to the famous girl. And the 
famous girl was standing on a chair in the living room waving the Golden Ticket madly at arm's 
length as though she were flagging a taxi. She was talking very fast and very loudly to everyone, 
but it was not easy to hear all that she said because she was chewing so ferociously upon a piece of 
gum at the same time. 
  

'"I'm a gum chewer, normally," she shouted, "but when I heard about these ticket things of 

Mr Wonka's, I gave up gum and started on chocolate bars in the hope of striking lucky. Now, of 
course, I'm back on gum. I just adore gum. I can't do without it. I munch it all day long except for a 
few minutes at mealtimes when I take it out and stick it behind my ear for safekeeping. To tell you 
the truth, I simply wouldn't feel comfortable if I didn't have that little wedge of gum to chew on 
every moment of the day, I really wouldn't. My mother says it's not ladylike and it looks ugly to 
see a girl's jaws going up and down like mine do all the time, but I don't agree. And who's she to 
criticize, anyway, because if you ask me, I'd say that her jaws are going up and down almost as 
much as mine are just from yelling at me every minute of the day." 

'"Now, Violet," Mrs Beauregarde said from a far corner of the room where she was standing 

'Beastly girl,' said Grandma Josephine. 
'Despicable!' said Grandma Georgina. 'She'll come to a sticky end one day, chewing all that 

on the piano to avoid being trampled by the mob. 
  
'"All right, Mother, keep your hair on!" Miss Beauregarde shouted. "And now," she went 
on, turning to the reporters again, "it may interest you to know that this piece of gum I'm chewing 
right at this moment is one I've been working on for over three months solid. That's a record, that 
is. It's beaten the record held by my best friend, Miss Cornelia Prinzmetel. And was she furious! 
It's my most treasured possession now, this piece of gum is. At night-time, I just stick it on the end 
of the bedpost, and it's as good as ever in the mornings — a bit hard at first, maybe, but it soon 
softens  up  again  after  I've  given  it  a  few  good  chews.  Before  I  started  chewing  for  the  world 
record, I used to change my piece of gum once a day. I used to do it in our lift on the way home 
from school. Why the lift? Because I liked sticking the gooey piece that I'd just finished with on to 
one of the control buttons. Then the next person who came along and pressed the button got my 
old gum on the end of his or her finger. Ha-ha! And what a racket they kicked up, some of them. 
You  get  the  best  results  with  women  who  have  expensive  gloves  on.  Oh  yes,  I'm  thrilled  to  be 
going to Mr Wonka's factory. And I understand that afterwards he's going to give me enough gum 
to last me for the rest of my whole life. Whoopee! Hooray!"' 
  
  
gum, you see if she doesn't.' 
  
  
The fourth Golden Ticket,' he read, 'was found by a boy called Mike Teavee.' 
'Another bad lot, I'll be bound,' muttered Grandma Josephine. 
  
'Don't interrupt, Grandma,' said Mrs Bucket. 
  
'The Teavee household,' said Mr Bucket, going on with his reading, 'was crammed, like all 
  
the  others,  with  excited  visitors  when  our  reporter  arrived,  but  young  Mike  Teavee,  the  lucky 
winner,  seemed  extremely  annoyed  by  the  whole  business.  "Can't  you  fools  see  I'm  watching 
television?" he said angrily. "I wish you wouldn't interrupt!" 
  
'The nine-year-old boy was seated before an enormous television set, with his eyes glued to 
the screen, and he was watching a film in which one bunch of gangsters was shooting up another 
bunch of gangsters with machine guns. Mike Teavee himself had no less than eighteen toy pistols 
of various sizes hanging from belts around his body, and every now and again he would leap up 
into the air and fire off half a dozen rounds from one or another of these weapons. 
  

'And who got the fourth Golden Ticket?' Charlie asked. 
'Now, let me see,' said Mr Bucket, peering at the newspaper again. 'Ah yes, here we are. 

'"Quiet!" he shouted, when someone tried to ask him a question. 
"Didn't I tell you not to interrupt! This show's an absolute whiz-banger! It's terrific! I watch 
it every day. I watch all of them every day, even the rotten ones, where there's no shooting. I like 
the  gangsters  best.  They're  terrific,  those  gangsters!  Especially  when  they  start  pumping  each 
other full of lead, or flashing the old stilettos, or giving each other the one-two-three with their 
knuckledusters!  Gosh,  what  wouldn't  I  give  to  be  doing  that  myself!  It's  the  life,  I  tell  you!  It's 
terrific!"' 
  
  
brats we've been hearing about?' 

'That's quite enough!' snapped Grandma Josephine. 'I can't bear to listen to it!' 
'Nor me,' said Grandma Georgina. 'Do all children behave like this nowadays — like these 

'Of course not,' said Mr Bucket, smiling at the old lady in the bed. 'Some do, of course. In 

'And now there's only one ticket left!' said Grandpa George. 
'Quite so,' sniffed Grandma Georgina. 'And just as sure as I'll be having cabbage soup for 

  
fact, quite a lot of them do. But not all.' 
  
  
supper tomorrow, that ticket'll go to some nasty little beast who doesn't deserve it!' 
  
9 
Grandpa Joe Takes a Gamble 
 

  
to see anything.' 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

'Like that?' said the old man. 
'Yes. Now a little bit more.' 
'You finish it,' said Grandpa Joe. 'I'm too nervous.' 
'No, Grandpa. You must do it yourself.' 
'Very well, then. Here goes.' He tore off the wrapper. 
They both stared at what lay underneath. It was a bar of chocolate — nothing more. 
All at once, they both saw the funny side of the whole thing, and they burst into peals of 

The next day, when Charlie came home from school and went in to see his grandparents, he 

found that only Grandpa Joe was awake. The other three were all snoring loudly. 
  
'Ssshh!' whispered Grandpa Joe, and he beckoned Charlie to come closer. Charlie tiptoed 
over  and  stood  beside  the  bed.  The  old  man  gave  Charlie  a  sly  grin,  and  then  he  started 
rummaging under his pillow with one hand; and when the hand came out again, there was an 
ancient leather purse clutched in the fingers. Under cover of the bedclothes, the old man opened 
the purse and tipped it upside down. Out fell a single silver sixpence. 'It's my secret hoard,' he 
whispered. 'The others don't know I've got it. And now, you and I are going to have one more 
fling at finding that last ticket. How about it, eh? But you'll have to help me.' 
'Are you sure you want to spend your money on that, Grandpa?' Charlie whispered. 
  
'Of  course  I'm  sure!'  spluttered  the  old  man  excitedly.  'Don't  stand  there  arguing!  I'm  as 
  
keen as you are to find that ticket! Here — take the money and run down the street to the nearest 
shop  and  buy  the  first  Wonka  bar  you  see  and  bring  it  straight  back  to  me,  and  we'll  open  it 
together.' 
  
was back. 

Charlie took the little silver coin, and slipped quickly out of the room. In five minutes, he 

'Have you got it?' whispered Grandpa Joe, his eyes shining with excitement. 
Charlie  nodded  and  held  out  the  bar  of  chocolate.  WONKA'S  NUTTY  CRUNCH 

'Good!' the old man whispered, sitting up in the bed and rubbing his hands. 'Now — come 

  
SURPRISE, it said on the wrapper. 
  
over here and sit close to me and we'll open it together. Are you ready?' 
  
'Yes,' Charlie said. 'I'm ready.' 
  
'All right. You tear off the first bit.' 
  
'No,' Charlie said, 'you paid for it. You do it all.' 
  
The old man's fingers were trembling most terribly as they fumbled with the wrapper. 'We 
don't have a hope, really,' he whispered, giggling a bit. 'You do know we don't have a hope, don't 
you?' 
  
  
  
you agree?' 
  

'Yes,' Charlie said. 'I know that.' 
They looked at each other, and both started giggling nervously. 
'Mind you,' said Grandpa Joe, 'there is just that tiny chance that it might be the one, don't 

'Yes,' Charlie said. 'Of course. Why don't you open it, Grandpa?' 
'All in good time, my boy, all in good time. Which end do you think I ought to open first?' 
'That corner. The one furthest from you. Just tear off a tiny bit, but not quite enough for us 

'What on earth's going on!' cried Grandma Josephine, waking up suddenly. 
'Nothing,' said Grandpa Joe. 'You go on back to sleep.' 

By evening, it lay four feet deep around the tiny house, and Mr Bucket had to dig a path 

laughter. 
  
  
 
10 
The Family Begins to Starve 
 
During the next two weeks, the weather turned very cold. First came the snow. It began 
 
very suddenly one morning just as Charlie Bucket was getting dressed for school. Standing by the 
window, he saw the huge flakes drifting slowly down  out  of  an  icy  sky  that  was  the  colour  of 
steel. 
  
from the front door to the road. 
  
After the snow, there came a freezing gale that blew for days and days without stopping. 
And oh, how bitter cold it was! Everything that Charlie touched seemed to be made of ice, and 
each time he stepped outside the door, the wind was like a knife on his cheek. 
  
Inside the house, little jets of freezing air came rushing in through the sides of the windows 
and under the doors, and there was no place to go to escape them. The four old ones lay silent and 
huddled in their bed, trying to keep the cold out of their bones. The excitement over the Golden 
Tickets  had  long  since  been  forgotten.  Nobody  in  the  family  gave  a  thought  now  to  anything 
except the two vital problems of trying to keep warm and trying to get enough to eat. 
  
There is something about very cold weather that gives one an enormous appetite. Most of 
us  find  ourselves  beginning  to  crave  rich  steaming  stews  and  hot  apple  pies  and  all  kinds  of 
delicious warming dishes; and because we are all a great deal luckier than we realize, we usually 
get what we want — or near enough. But Charlie Bucket never got what he wanted because the 
family  couldn't  afford  it,  and  as  the  cold  weather  went  on  and  on,  he  became  ravenously  and 
desperately hungry. Both bars of chocolate, the birthday one and the one Grandpa Joe had bought, 
had long since been nibbled away, and all he got now were those thin, cabbagy meals three times 
a day. 
Then all at once, the meals became even thinner. 
  
  
The  reason  for  this  was  that  the  toothpaste  factory,  the  place  where  Mr  Bucket  worked, 
suddenly went bust and had to close down. Quickly, Mr Bucket tried to get another job. But he 
had  no  luck.  In  the  end,  the  only  way  in  which  he  managed  to  earn  a  few  pennies  was  by 
shovelling snow in the streets. But it wasn't enough to buy even a quarter of the food that seven 
people  needed.  The  situation  became  desperate.  Breakfast  was  a  single  slice  of  bread  for  each 
person now, and lunch was maybe half a boiled potato. 
Slowly but surely, everybody in the house began to starve. 
  
  
And  every  day,  little  Charlie  Bucket,  trudging  through  the  snow  on  his  way  to  school, 
would have to pass Mr Willy Wonka's giant chocolate factory. And every day, as he came near to 
it,  he  would  lift  his  small  pointed  nose  high  in  the  air  and  sniff  the  wonderful  sweet  smell  of 
melting chocolate. Sometimes, he would stand motionless outside the gates for several minutes on 
end, taking deep swallowing breaths as though he were trying to eat the smell itself. 
  
'That child,' said Grandpa Joe, poking his head up from under the blanket one icy morning, 
'that child has got to have more food. It doesn't matter about us. We're too old to bother with. But 
a growing boy! He can't go on like this! He's beginning to look like a skeleton!' 
  
'What  can  one  do?'  murmured  Grandma  Josephine  miserably.  'He  refuses  to  take  any  of 
ours.  I  hear  his  mother  tried  to  slip  her  own  piece  of  bread  on  to  his  plate  at  breakfast  this 
morning, but he wouldn't touch it. He made her take it back.' 
  
  
  

'He's a fine little fellow,' said Grandpa George. 'He deserves better than this.' 
The cruel weather went on and on. 
And  every  day,  Charlie  Bucket  grew  thinner  and  thinner.  His  face  became  frighteningly 

white and pinched. The skin was drawn so tightly over the cheeks that you could see the shapes of 
the bones underneath. It seemed doubtful whether he could go on much longer like this without 
becoming dangerously ill. 
  
And  now,  very  calmly,  with  that  curious  wisdom  that  seems  to  come  so  often  to  small 
children in times of hardship, he began to make little changes here and there in some of the things 
that he did, so as to save his strength. In the mornings, he left the house ten minutes earlier so that 
he could walk slowly to school, without ever having to run. He sat quietly in the classroom during 
break, resting himself, while the others rushed outdoors and threw snowballs and wrestled in the 
snow. Everything he did now, he did slowly and carefully, to prevent exhaustion. 
  
Then  one  afternoon,  walking  back  home  with  the  icy  wind  in  his  face  (and  incidentally 
feeling hungrier than he had ever felt before), his eye was caught suddenly by something silvery 
lying in the gutter, in the snow. Charlie stepped off the kerb and bent down to examine it. Part of 
it was buried under the snow, but he saw at once what it was. 
It was a fifty-pence piece! 
  
Quickly he looked around him. 
  
Had somebody just dropped it? 
  
No — that was impossible because of the way part of it was buried. 
  
  
Several  people  went  hurrying  past  him  on  the  pavement,  their  chins  sunk  deep  in  the 
collars of their coats, their feet crunching in the snow. None of them was searching for any money; 
none of them was taking the slightest notice of the small boy crouching in the gutter. 

Then was it his, this fifty pence? 
Could he have it? 
Carefully, Charlie pulled it out from under the snow. It was damp and dirty, but otherwise 

A WHOLE fifty pence! 
He held it tightly between his shivering fingers, gazing down at it. It meant one thing to 

  
  
perfect. 
  
  
him at that moment, only one thing. It meant FOOD. 
  
Automatically, Charlie turned and began moving towards the nearest shop. It was only ten 
paces  away  .  .  .  it  was  a  newspaper  and  stationery  shop,  the  kind  that  sells  almost  everything, 
including sweets and cigars . . . and what he would do, he whispered quickly to himself . . . he 
would buy one luscious bar of chocolate and eat it all up, every bit of it, right then and there . . . 
and the rest of the money he would take straight back home and give to his mother. 
  
11 
The Miracle 
 

Charlie entered the shop and laid the damp fifty pence on the counter. 
'One  Wonka's  Whipple-Scrumptious  Fudgemallow  Delight,'  he  said,  remembering  how 

much he had loved the one he had on his birthday. 
The man behind the counter looked fat and well-fed. He had big lips and fat cheeks and a 
  
very fat neck. The fat around his neck bulged out all around the top of his collar like a rubber ring. 
He turned and reached behind him for the chocolate bar, then he turned back again and handed it 
to Charlie. Charlie grabbed it and quickly tore off the wrapper and took an enormous bite. Then 
he took another . . . and another . . . and oh, the joy of being able to cram large pieces of something 
sweet and solid into one's mouth! The sheer blissful joy of being able to fill one's mouth with rich 
solid food! 
  
  
  
tummy-ache if you swallow it like that without chewing.' 
  

'You look like you wanted that one, sonny,' the shopkeeper said pleasantly. 
Charlie nodded, his mouth bulging with chocolate. 
The shopkeeper put Charlie's change on the counter. 'Take it easy,' he said. 'It'll give you a 

Charlie went on wolfing the chocolate. He couldn't stop. And in less than half a minute, the 

'I think,' he said quietly, 'I think . . . I'll have just one more of those chocolate bars. The same 

whole  thing  had  disappeared  down  his  throat.  He  was  quite  out  of  breath,  but  he  felt 
marvellously, extraordinarily happy. He reached out a hand to take the change. Then he paused. 
His eyes were just above the level of the counter. They were staring at the silver coins lying there. 
The  coins  were  all  five-penny  pieces.  There  were  nine  of  them  altogether.  Surely  it  wouldn't 
matter if he spent just one more . . . 
  
kind as before, please.' 
  
Whipple-Scrumptious Fudgemallow Delight from the shelf. He laid it on the counter. 
  
wrapper . . . there came a brilliant flash of gold. 
Charlie's heart stood still. 
  
'It's a Golden Ticket!' screamed the shopkeeper, leaping about a foot in the air. 'You've got a 
  
Golden Ticket! You've found the last Golden Ticket! Hey, would you believe it! Come and look at 
this,  everybody!  The  kid's  found  Wonka's  last  Golden  Ticket!  There  it  is!  It's  right  here  in  his 
hands!' 
  
It  seemed  as  though  the  shopkeeper  might  be  going  to  have  a  fit.  'In  my  shop,  too!'  he 
yelled. 'He found it right here in my own little shop! Somebody call the newspapers quick and let 
them know! Watch out now, sonny! Don't tear it as you unwrap it! That thing's precious!' 
  
In a few seconds, there was a crowd of about twenty people clustering around Charlie, and 
many  more  were  pushing  their  way  in  from  the  street.  Everybody  wanted  to  get  a  look  at  the 
Golden Ticket and at the lucky finder. 
  
  
  
a day I've been buying for weeks and weeks!' 
  
supply!' 
'He'll need it, the skinny little shrimp!' a girl said, laughing. 
  
Charlie  hadn't  moved.  He  hadn't  even  unwrapped  the  Golden  Ticket  from  around  the 
  
chocolate. He was standing very still, holding it tightly with both hands while the crowd pushed 
and shouted all around him. He felt quite dizzy. There was a peculiar floating sensation coming 
over  him,  as  though  he  were  floating  up  in  the  air  like  a  balloon.  His  feet  didn't  seem  to  be 
touching the ground at all. 

'Where is it?' somebody shouted. 'Hold it up so all of us can see it!' 
'There it is, there!' someone else shouted. 'He's holding it in his hands! See the gold shining!' 
'How did he manage to find it, I'd like to know?' a large boy shouted angrily. 'Twenty bars 

'Think  of  all  the  free  stuff  he'll  be  getting  too!'  another  boy  said  enviously.  'A  lifetime 

'Why  not?'  the  fat  shopkeeper  said,  reaching  behind  him  again  and  taking  another 

Charlie picked it up and tore off the wrapper . . . and suddenly . . . from underneath the 

He could hear his heart thumping away loudly somewhere in his throat. 
  
At  that  point,  he  became  aware  of  a  hand  resting  lightly  on  his  shoulder,  and  when  he 
looked up, he saw a tall man standing over him. 'Listen,' the man whispered. 'I'll buy it from you. 
I'll give you fifty pounds. How about it, eh? And I'll give you a new bicycle as well. Okay?' 
  
'Are you crazy?' shouted a woman who was standing equally close. 'Why, I'd give him two 
hundred pounds for that ticket! You want to sell that ticket for two hundred pounds, young man?' 
  
'That's  quite  enough  of  that!'  the  fat  shopkeeper  shouted,  pushing  his  way  through  the 
crowd and taking Charlie firmly by the arm. 'Leave the kid alone, will you! Make way there! Let 
him out!' And to Charlie, as he led him to the door, he whispered, 'Don't you let anybody have it! 
Take it straight home, quickly, before you lose it! Run all the way and don't stop till you get there, 
you understand?' 
  
  
have a feeling you needed a break like this. I'm awfully glad you got it. Good luck to you, sonny.' 
  
'Thank  you,'  Charlie  said,  and  off  he  went,  running  through  the  snow  as  fast  as  his  legs 
would go. And as he flew past Mr Willy Wonka's factory, he turned and waved at it and sang out, 
'I'll be seeing you! I'll be seeing you soon!' And five minutes later he arrived at his own home. 

Charlie nodded. 
'You know something,' the fat shopkeeper said, pausing a moment and smiling at Charlie, 'I 

Charlie burst through the front door, shouting, 'Mother! Mother! Mother!' 
Mrs Bucket was in the old grandparents' room, serving them their evening soup. 
  
  
'Mother!'  yelled  Charlie,  rushing  in  on  them  like  a  hurricane.  'Look!  I've  got  it!  Look, 
Mother, look! The last Golden Ticket! It's mine! I found some money in the street and I bought two 
bars of chocolate and the second one had the Golden Ticket and there were crowds of people all 
around me wanting to see it and the shopkeeper rescued me and I ran all the way home and here I 
am! IT'S THE FIFTH GOLDEN TICKET, MOTHER, AND I'VE FOUND IT!' 
  
Mrs Bucket simply stood and stared, while the four old grandparents, who were sitting up 
in bed balancing bowls of soup on their laps, all dropped their spoons with a clatter and froze 
against their pillows. 
  

For about ten seconds there was absolute silence in the room. 
Nobody dared to speak or move. It was a magic moment. 
Then,  very  softly,  Grandpa  Joe  said,  'You're  pulling  our  legs,  Charlie,  aren't  you?  You're 

'I  am  not!'  cried  Charlie,  rushing  up  to  the  bed  and  holding  out  the  large  and  beautiful 

Grandpa Joe leaned forward and took a close look, his nose almost touching the ticket. The 

  
having a little joke?' 
  
Golden Ticket for him to see. 
  
others watched him, waiting for the verdict. 
  
Then very slowly, with a slow and marvellous grin spreading all over his face, Grandpa Joe 
lifted his head and looked straight at Charlie. The colour was rushing to his cheeks, and his eyes 
were wide open, shining with joy, and in the centre of each eye, right in the very centre, in the 
black pupil, a little spark of wild excitement was slowly dancing. Then the old man took a deep 
breath, and suddenly, with no warning whatsoever, an explosion seemed to take place inside him. 
He threw up his arms and yelled 'Yippeeeeeeee!' And at the same time, his long bony body rose 
up out of the bed and his bowl of soup went flying into the face of Grandma Josephine, and in one 
fantastic leap, this old fellow of ninety-six and a half, who hadn't been out of bed these last twenty 
years, jumped on to the floor and started doing a dance of victory in his pyjamas. 
'Yippeeeeeeeeee!' he shouted. 'Three cheers for Charlie! Hip, hip, hooray!' 
  
At  this  point,  the  door  opened,  and  Mr  Bucket  walked  into  the  room.  He  was  cold  and 

12 
What It Said on the Golden Ticket 
 

'Let me see it, Charlie,' Mr Bucket said, collapsing into a chair and holding out his hand. 

tired, and he looked it. All day long, he had been shovelling snow in the streets. 
  
'Cripes!' he cried. 'What's going on in here?' 
  
It didn't take them long to tell him what had happened. 
  
'I don't believe it!' he said. 'It's not possible.' 
  
'Show him the ticket, Charlie!' shouted Grandpa Joe, who was still dancing around the floor 
like  a  dervish  in  his  striped  pyjamas.  'Show  your  father  the  fifth  and  last  Golden  Ticket  in  the 
world!' 
  
Charlie came forward with the precious document. 
  
It was a very beautiful thing, this Golden Ticket, having been made, so it seemed, from a 
sheet of pure gold hammered out almost to the thinness of paper. On one side of it, printed by 
some clever method in jet-black letters, was the invitation itself — from Mr Wonka. 
  
what it says.' 
  
Mr Bucket held the lovely Golden Ticket up close to his eyes. His hands were trembling 
slightly, and he seemed to be overcome by the whole business. He took several deep breaths. Then 
he cleared his throat, and said, 'All right, I'll read it. Here we go: 
  
  

'Read it aloud,' said Grandpa Joe, climbing back into bed again at last. 'Let's all hear exactly 

'Greetings to you, the lucky finder of this Golden Ticket, from Mr Willy Wonka! I shake you 

warmly  by  the  hand!  Tremendous  things  are  in  store  for  you!  Many  wonderful  surprises  await 
you! For now, I do invite you to come to my factory and be my guest for one whole day — you 
and all others who are lucky enough to find my Golden Tickets. I, Willy Wonka, will conduct you 
around the factory myself, showing you everything that there is to see, and afterwards, when it is 
time  to  leave,  you  will  be  escorted  home  by  a  procession  of  large  trucks.  These  trucks,  I  can 
promise you, will be loaded with enough delicious eatables to last you and your entire household 
for many years. If, at any time thereafter, you should run out of supplies, you have only to come 
back to the factory and show this Golden Ticket, and I shall be happy to refill your cupboard with 
whatever you want. In this way, you will be able to keep yourself supplied with tasty morsels for 
the rest of your life. But this is by no means the most exciting thing that will happen on the day of 
your visit. I am preparing other surprises that are even more marvellous and more fantastic for 
you  and  for  all  my  beloved  Golden  Ticket  holders  —  mystic  and  marvellous  surprises  that  will 
entrance,  delight,  intrigue,  astonish,  and  perplex  you  beyond  measure.  In  your  wildest  dreams 
you could not imagine that such things could happen to you! Just wait and see! And now, here are 
your instructions:  
 

'The first day of February!' cried Mrs Bucket. 'But that's tomorrow! Today is the last day of 

The day I have chosen for the visit is the first day in the month of February. On this day, 
and on no other, you must come to the factory gates at ten o'clock sharp in the morning. Don't be 
late! And you are allowed to bring with you either one or two members of your own family to 
look after you and to ensure that you don't get into mischief. One more thing — be certain to have 
this ticket with you, otherwise you will not be admitted. 
  
(Signed) Willy Wonka.' 
  
  
January. I know it is!' 
'Cripes!' said Mr Bucket. 'I think you're right!' 
  
  
'You're just in time!' shouted Grandpa Joe. 'There's not a moment to lose. You must start 
making  preparations  at  once!  Wash  your  face,  comb  your  hair,  scrub  your  hands,  brush  your 
teeth, blow your nose, cut your nails, polish your shoes, iron your shirt, and for heaven's sake, get 
all that mud off your pants! You must get ready, my boy! You must get ready for the biggest day 
of your life!' 
  
'Now don't over-excite yourself, Grandpa,' Mrs Bucket said. 'And don't fluster poor Charlie. 
We must all try to keep very calm. Now the first thing to decide is this — who is going to go with 
Charlie to the factory?' 

'I will!' shouted Grandpa Joe, leaping out of bed once again. 'I'll take him! I'll look after him! 

Mrs Bucket smiled at the old man, then she turned to her husband and said, 'How about 

You leave it to me!' 
  
you, dear? Don't you think you ought to go?' 
  
'Well . . .' Mr Bucket said, pausing to think about it, 'no . . . I'm not so sure that I should.' 
  
'But you must.' 
  
'There's no must about it, my dear,' Mr Bucket said gently. 'Mind you, I'd love to go. It'll be 
tremendously exciting. But on the other hand . . . I believe that the person who really deserves to 
go most of all is Grandpa Joe himself. He seems to know more about it than we do. Provided, of 
course, that he feels well enough . . .' 
  
room. 
  
'He certainly seems well enough,' Mrs Bucket said, laughing. 'Yes . . . perhaps you're right 
after all. Perhaps Grandpa Joe should be the one to go with him. I certainly can't go myself and 
leave the other three old people all alone in bed for a whole day.' 
  

'Hallelujah!' yelled Grandpa Joe. 'Praise the Lord!' 
At that point, there came a loud knock on the front door. Mr Bucket went to open it, and 
the  next  moment,  swarms  of  newspapermen  and  photographers  were  pouring  into  the  house. 

'Yippeeeeee!'  shouted  Grandpa  Joe,  seizing  Charlie  by  the  hands  and  dancing  round  the 

They had tracked down the finder of the fifth Golden Ticket, and now they all wanted to get the 
full  story  for  the  front  pages  of  the  morning  papers.  For  several  hours,  there  was  complete 
pandemonium in the little house, and it must have been nearly midnight before Mr Bucket was 
able to get rid of them so that Charlie could go to bed. 
  
13 
The Big Day Arrives 
 

The sun was shining brightly on the morning of the big day, but the ground was still white 

Right beside the gates, in a small group that was carefully shielded from the crowds by the 

The tall bony figure of Grandpa Joe could be seen standing quietly among them, and beside 

'And you know what?' somebody else shouted back. 'She's still chewing that dreadful old 

'There's  Violet  Beauregarde!'  he  heard  someone  shouting.  'That's  her  all  right!  I  can 

with snow and the air was very cold. 
  
Outside the gates of Wonka's factory, enormous crowds of people had gathered to watch 
the  five  lucky  ticket  holders  going  in.  The  excitement  was  tremendous.  It  was  just  before  ten 
o'clock. The crowds were pushing and shouting, and policemen with arms linked were trying to 
hold them back from the gates. 
  
police, stood the five famous children, together with the grown-ups who had come with them. 
  
him, holding tightly on to his hand, was little Charlie Bucket himself. 
  
All the children, except Charlie, had both their mothers and fathers with them, and it was a 
good thing that they had, otherwise the whole party might have got out of hand. They were so 
eager to get going that their parents were having to hold them back by force to prevent them from 
climbing over the gates. 'Be patient!' cried the fathers. 'Be still! It's not time yet! It's not ten o'clock!' 
  
Behind  him,  Charlie  Bucket  could  hear  the  shouts  of  the  people  in  the  crowd  as  they 
pushed and fought to get a glimpse of the famous children. 
  
remember her face from the newspapers!' 
  
piece of gum she's had for three months! You look at her jaws! They're still working on it!' 
  
  
  
  

'Who's the big fat boy?' 
'That's Augustus Gloop!' 
'So it is!' 
'Enormous, isn't he!'  
'Fantastic!' 
  
'Who's the kid with a picture of The Lone Ranger stencilled on his windcheater?' 
  
'That's Mike Teavee! He's the television fiend!' 
  
'He must be crazy! Look at all those toy pistols he's got hanging all over him!' 
  
'The one I want to see is Veruca Salt!' shouted another voice in the crowd. 'She's the girl 
whose father bought up half a million chocolate bars and then made the workers in his peanut 
factory unwrap every one of them until they found a Golden Ticket! He gives her anything she 
wants! Absolutely anything! She only has to start screaming for it and she gets it!' 
  
  
  
  
  
standing beside the old fellow who looks like a skeleton. Very close to us. Just there! See him?' 
  
  
  
  
squeeze, and the old man looked down at Charlie and smiled. 

'Why hasn't he got a coat on in this cold weather?' 
'Don't ask me. Maybe he can't afford to buy one.' 
'Goodness me! He must be freezing!' 
Charlie,  standing  only  a  few  paces  away  from  the  speaker,  gave  Grandpa  Joe's  hand  a 

'Dreadful, isn't it?' 
'Shocking, I call it!' 
'Which do you think is her?' 
'That one! Over there on the left! The little girl in the silver mink coat!' 
'Which one is Charlie Bucket?' 

'Charlie  Bucket?  He  must  be  that  skinny  little  shrimp 

Somewhere in the distance, a church clock began striking ten. 
Very slowly, with a loud creaking of rusty hinges, the great iron gates of the factory began 

The  crowd  became  suddenly  silent.  The  children  stopped  jumping  about.  All  eyes  were 

'There he is!' somebody shouted, 'That's him!' 
And so it was! 

  
to swing open. 
  
fixed upon the gates. 
  
  
 
14 
Mr Willy Wonka 

 
Mr Wonka was standing all alone just inside the open gates of the factory. 
And what an extraordinary little man he was! 
He had a black top hat on his head. 
He wore a tail coat made of a beautiful plum-coloured velvet. 
  
His trousers were bottle green. 
  
His gloves were pearly grey. 
  
And in one hand he carried a fine gold-topped walking cane. 
  
  
Covering his chin, there was a small, neat, pointed black beard — a goatee. And his eyes — 
his eyes were most marvellously bright. They seemed to be sparkling and twinkling at you all the 
time. The whole face, in fact, was alight with fun and laughter. 
  
And oh, how clever he looked! How quick and sharp and full of life! He kept making quick 
jerky little movements with his head, cocking it this way and that, and taking everything in with 
those bright twinkling eyes. He was like a squirrel in the quickness of his movements, like a quick 
clever old squirrel from the park. 

His voice was high and flutey. 'Will you come forward one at a time, please,' he called out, 

Suddenly, he did a funny little skipping dance in the snow, and he spread his arms wide, 
and he smiled at the five children who were clustered near the gates, and he called out, 'Welcome, 
my little friends! Welcome to the factory!' 
  
'and bring your parents. Then show me your Golden Ticket and give me your name. Who's first?' 
The big fat boy stepped up. 'I'm Augustus Gloop,' he said. 
  
  
'Augustus!' cried Mr Wonka, seizing his hand and pumping it up and down with terrific 
force. 'My dear boy, how good to see you! Delighted! Charmed! Overjoyed to have you with us! 
And these are your parents? How nice! Come in! Come in! That's right! Step through the gates!' 
  
Mr Wonka was clearly just as excited as everybody else. 
  
'My name,' said the next child to go forward, 'is Veruca Salt.' 
  
'My  dear  Veruca!  How  do  you  do?  What  a  pleasure  this  is!  You  do  have  an  interesting 
name, don't you? I always thought that a veruca was a sort of wart that you got on the sole of your 
foot! But I must be wrong, mustn't I? How pretty you look in that lovely mink coat! I'm so glad 
you could come! Dear me, this is going to be such an exciting day! I do hope you enjoy it! I'm sure 
you will! I know you will! Your father? How are you, Mr Salt? And Mrs Salt? Overjoyed to see 
you! Yes, the ticket is quite in order! Please go in!' 
  
The next two children, Violet Beauregarde and Mike Teavee, came forward to have their 
tickets  examined  and  then  to  have  their  arms  practically  pumped  off  their  shoulders  by  the 
energetic Mr Wonka. 
  
And last of all, a small nervous voice whispered, 'Charlie Bucket.' 
  
'Charlie!' cried Mr Wonka. 'Well, well, well! So there you are! You're the one who found 
your ticket only yesterday, aren't you? Yes, yes. I read all about it in this morning's papers! Just in 
time, my dear boy! I'm so glad! So happy for you! And this? Your grandfather? Delighted to meet 
you,  sir!  Overjoyed!  Enraptured!  Enchanted!  All  right!  Excellent!  Is  everybody  in  now?  Five 
children?  Yes!  Good!  Now  will  you  please  follow  me!  Our  tour  is  about  to  begin!  But  do  keep 

together! Please don't wander off by yourselves! I shouldn't like to lose any of you at this stage of 
the proceedings! Oh, dear me, no!' 
Charlie glanced back over his shoulder and saw the great iron entrance gates slowly closing 
  
behind him. The crowds on the outside were still pushing and shouting. Charlie took a last look at 
them. Then, as the gates closed with a clang, all sight of the outside world disappeared. 
  
'Here we are!' cried Mr Wonka, trotting along in front of the group. 'Through this big red 
door,  please!  That's  right!  It's  nice  and  warm  inside!  I  have  to  keep  it  warm  inside  the  factory 
because of the workers! My workers are used to an extremely hot climate! They can't stand the 
cold! They'd perish if they went outdoors in this weather! They'd freeze to death!' 
'But who are these workers?' asked Augustus Gloop. 
  
  
'All in good time, my dear boy!' said Mr Wonka, smiling at Augustus. 'Be patient! You shall 
see everything as we go along! Are all of you inside? Good! Would you mind closing the door? 
Thank you!' 
  
Charlie  Bucket  found  himself  standing  in  a  long  corridor  that  stretched  away  in  front  of 
him as far as he could see. The corridor was so wide that a car could easily have been driven along 
it. The walls were pale pink, the lighting was soft and pleasant. 
'How lovely and warm!' whispered Charlie. 
  
  
'I know. And what a marvellous smell!' answered Grandpa Joe, taking a long deep sniff. All 
the  most  wonderful  smells  in  the  world  seemed  to  be  mixed  up  in  the  air  around  them  —  the 
smell of roasting coffee and burnt sugar and melting chocolate and mint and violets and crushed 
hazelnuts and apple blossom and caramel and lemon peel . . . 
  
And far away in the distance, from the heart of the great factory, came a muffled roar of 
energy as though some monstrous gigantic machine were spinning its wheels at breakneck speed. 
'Now this, my dear children,' said Mr Wonka, raising his voice above the noise, 'this is the 
main corridor. Will you please hang your coats and hats on those pegs over there, and then follow 
me. That's the way! Good! Everyone ready? Come on, then! Here we go!' He trotted off rapidly 
down the corridor with the tails of his plum-coloured velvet coat flapping behind him, and the 
visitors all hurried after him. 
  
It was quite a large party of people, when you came to think of it. There were nine grown-
ups and five children, fourteen in all. So you can imagine that there was a good deal of pushing 
and shoving as they hustled and bustled down the passage, trying to keep up with the swift little 
figure in front of them. 'Come on!' cried Mr Wonka. 'Get a move on, please! We'll never get round 
today if you dawdle like this!' 
  
  
  
  
  

Soon, he turned right off the main corridor into another slightly narrower passage. 
Then he turned left. 
Then left again. 
Then right. 
Then left. 
Then right. 
Then right. 
Then left. 
The  place  was  like  a  gigantic  rabbit  warren,  with  passages  leading  this  way  and  that  in 

  
  
  
every direction. 
'Don't you let go my hand, Charlie,' whispered Grandpa Joe. 
  
  
'Notice how all these passages are sloping downwards!' called out Mr Wonka. 'We are now 
going  underground!  All  the  most  important  rooms  in  my  factory  are  deep  down  below  the 
surface!' 
'Why is that?' somebody asked. 
  
  
'There wouldn't be nearly enough space for them up on top!' answered Mr Wonka. 'These 
rooms we are going to see are enormous! They're larger than football fields! No building in the 
world would be big enough to house them! But down here, underneath the ground, I've got all the 

Mr Wonka turned right. 
He turned left. 
He turned right again. 
The passages were sloping steeper and steeper downhill now. 
Then  suddenly,  Mr  Wonka  stopped.  In  front  of  him,  there  was  a  shiny  metal  door.  The 

space I want. There's no limit — so long as I hollow it out.' 
  
  
  
  
  
party crowded round. On the door, in large letters, it said: 
  
THE CHOCOLATE ROOM 
  
15 
The Chocolate Room 
 

Mr  Wonka  opened  the  door.  Five  children and  nine  grown-ups  pushed  their  ways  in  — 

They were looking down upon a lovely valley. There were green meadows on either side of 

'An  important  room,  this!'  cried  Mr  Wonka,  taking  a  bunch  of  keys  from  his  pocket  and 
slipping one into the keyhole of the door. 'This is the nerve centre of the whole factory, the heart of 
the  whole  business!  And  so  beautiful!  I  insist  upon  my  rooms  being  beautiful!  I  can't  abide 
ugliness in factories! In we go, then! But do be careful, my dear children! Don't lose your heads! 
Don't get over-excited! Keep very calm!' 
  
and oh, what an amazing sight it was that now met their eyes! 
  
the valley, and along the bottom of it there flowed a great brown river. 
What is more, there was a tremendous waterfall halfway along the river — a steep cliff over 
  
which the water curled and rolled in a solid sheet, and then went crashing down into a boiling 
churning whirlpool of froth and spray. 
  
Below  the  waterfall  (and  this  was  the  most  astonishing  sight  of  all),  a  whole  mass  of 
enormous glass pipes were dangling down into the river from somewhere high up in the ceiling! 
They really were enormous, those pipes. There must have been a dozen of them at least, and they 
were  sucking  up  the  brownish  muddy  water  from  the  river  and  carrying  it  away  to  goodness 
knows  where.  And  because  they  were  made  of  glass,  you  could  see  the  liquid  flowing  and 
bubbling along inside them, and above the noise of the waterfall, you could hear the never-ending 
suck-suck-sucking sound of the pipes as they did their work. 
  
Graceful  trees  and  bushes  were  growing  along  the  riverbanks  —  weeping  willows  and 
alders  and  tall  clumps  of  rhododendrons  with  their  pink  and  red  and  mauve  blossoms.  In  the 
meadows there were thousands of buttercups. 
  
'There!' cried Mr Wonka, dancing up and down and pointing his gold-topped cane at the 
great brown river. 'It's all chocolate! Every drop of that river is hot melted chocolate of the finest 
quality. The very finest quality. There's enough chocolate in there to fill every bathtub in the entire 
country! And all the swimming pools as well! Isn't it terrific? And just look at my pipes! They suck 
up  the  chocolate  and  carry  it  away  to  all  the  other  rooms  in  the  factory  where  it  is  needed! 
Thousands of gallons an hour, my dear children! Thousands and thousands of gallons!' 
  
The children and their parents were too flabbergasted to speak. They were staggered. They 
were dumbfounded. They were bewildered and dazzled. They were completely bowled over by 
the hugeness of the whole thing. They simply stood and stared. 
  
'The waterfall is most important!' Mr Wonka went on. 'It mixes the chocolate! It churns it 
up! It pounds it and beats it! It makes it light and frothy! No other factory in the world mixes its 
chocolate by waterfall! But it's the only way to do it properly! The only way! And do you like my 
trees?' he cried, pointing with his stick. 'And my lovely bushes? Don't you think they look pretty? I 
told you I hated ugliness! And of course they are all eatable! All made of something different and 
delicious! And do you like my meadows? Do you like my grass and my buttercups? The grass you 
are  standing  on,  my  dear  little  ones,  is  made  of  a  new  kind  of  soft,  minty  sugar  that  I've  just 

invented! I call it swudge! Try a blade! Please do! It's delectable!' 
  
except Augustus Gloop, who took a big handful. 

Automatically, everybody bent down and picked one blade of grass — everybody, that is, 

And Violet Beauregarde, before tasting her blade of grass, took the piece of world-record-

'Isn't it wonderful!' whispered Charlie. 'Hasn't it got a wonderful taste, Grandpa?' 
'I could eat the whole field!' said Grandpa Joe, grinning with delight. 'I could go around on 

breaking chewing-gum out of her mouth and stuck it carefully behind her ear. 
  
  
all fours like a cow and eat every blade of grass in the field!' 
  
'Try a buttercup!' cried Mr Wonka. 'They're even nicer!' 
  
Suddenly,  the  air  was  filled  with  screams  of  excitement.  The  screams  came  from  Veruca 
Salt.  She  was  pointing  frantically  to  the  other  side  of  the  river.  'Look!  Look  over  there!'  she 
screamed. 'What is it? He's moving! He's walking! It's a little person! It's a little man! Down there 
below the waterfall!' 
  
  
  
  

Everybody stopped picking buttercups and stared across the river. 
'She's right, Grandpa!' cried Charlie. 'It is a little man! Can you see him?' 
'I see him, Charlie!' said Grandpa Joe excitedly. 
And now everybody started shouting at once.   
'There's two of them!' 
'My gosh, so there is!' 
  
'There's more than two! There's one, two, three, four, five!' 
  
'What are they doing?' 
  
'Where do they come from?' 
  
'Who are they?' 
  
Children and parents alike rushed down to the edge of the river to get a closer look. 
  
'Aren't they fantastic!' 
  
'No higher than my knee!' 
  
'Look at their funny long hair!' 
  
  
The tiny men — they were no larger than medium-sized dolls — had stopped what they 
were doing, and now they were staring back across the river at the visitors. One of them pointed 
towards  the  children,  and  then  he  whispered  something  to  the  other  four,  and  all  five  of  them 
burst into peals of laughter. 
  

'But they can't be real people,' Charlie said. 
'Of course they're real people,' Mr Wonka answered. 'They're Oompa-Loompas.' 

  
  
16 
The Oompa-Loompas 
 

'Oompa-Loompas!' everyone said at once. 'Oompa-Loompas!' 
  
'Imported direct from Loompaland,' said Mr Wonka proudly. 
  
'There's no such place,' said Mrs Salt. 
  
'Excuse me, dear lady, but . . .' 
  
'Mr Wonka,' cried Mrs Salt. 'I'm a teacher of geography.’ 
  
'Then  you'll  know  all  about  it,'  said  Mr  Wonka.  'And  oh,  what  a  terrible  country  it  is! 
Nothing but thick jungles infested by the most dangerous beasts in the world — hornswogglers 
and  snozzwangers  and  those  terrible  wicked  whangdoodles.  A  whangdoodle  would  eat  ten 
Oompa-Loompas for breakfast and come galloping back for a second helping. When I went out 
there, I found the little Oompa-Loompas living in tree houses. They had to live in tree houses to 
escape  from  the  whangdoodles  and  the  hornswogglers  and  the  snozzwangers.  And  they  were 
living on green caterpillars, and the caterpillars tasted revolting, and the Oompa-Loompas spent 
every  moment  of  their  days  climbing  through  the  treetops  looking  for  other  things  to  mash  up 

with the caterpillars to make them taste better — red beetles, for instance, and eucalyptus leaves, 
and the bark of the bong-bong tree, all of them beastly, but not quite so beastly as the caterpillars. 
Poor little Oompa-Loompas! The one food that they longed for more than any other was the cacao 
bean. But they couldn't get it. An Oompa-Loompa was lucky if he found three or four cacao beans 
a year. But oh, how they craved them. They used to dream about cacao beans all night and talk 
about  them  all  day.  You  had  only  to  mention  the  word  "cacao"  to  an  Oompa-Loompa  and  he 
would start dribbling at the mouth. The cacao bean,' Mr Wonka continued, 'which grows on the 
cacao tree, happens to be the thing from which all chocolate is made. You cannot make chocolate 
without  the  cacao  bean.  The  cacao  bean  is  chocolate.  I  myself  use  billions  of  cacao  beans  every 
week in this factory. And so, my dear children, as soon as I discovered that the Oompa-Loompas 
were crazy about this particular food, I climbed up to their tree-house village and poked my head 
in through the door of the tree house belonging to the leader of the tribe. The poor little fellow, 
looking  thin  and  starved,  was  sitting  there  trying  to  eat  a  bowl  full  of  mashed-up  green 
caterpillars  without  being  sick.  "Look  here,"  I  said  (speaking  not  in  English,  of  course,  but  in 
Oompa-Loompish), "look here, if you and all your people will come back to my country and live 
in  my  factory,  you  can  have  all  the  cacao  beans  you  want!  I've  got  mountains  of  them  in  my 
storehouses! You can have cacao beans for every meal! You can gorge yourselves silly on them! I'll 
even pay your wages in cacao beans if you wish!" 

'"You really mean it?" asked the Oompa-Loompa leader, leaping up from his chair. 
'"Of course I mean it," I said. "And you can have chocolate as well. Chocolate tastes even 

'The little man gave a great whoop of joy and threw his bowl of mashed caterpillars right 

  
better than cacao beans because it's got milk and sugar added." 
  
out of the tree-house window. "It's a deal!" he cried. "Come on! Let's go!" 
  
'So I shipped them all over here, every man, woman, and child in the Oompa-Loompa tribe. 
It was easy. I smuggled them over in large packing cases with holes in them, and they all got here 
safely. They are wonderful workers. They all speak English now. They love dancing and music. 
They are always making up songs. I expect you will hear a good deal of singing today from time 
to time. I must warn you, though, that they are rather mischievous. They like jokes. They still wear 
the same kind of clothes they wore in the jungle. They insist upon that. The men, as you can see 
for  yourselves  across  the  river,  wear  only  deerskins.  The  women  wear  leaves,  and  the  children 
wear nothing at all. The women use fresh leaves every day . . .' 
  
'Daddy!' shouted Veruca Salt (the girl who got everything she wanted). 'Daddy! I want an 
Oompa-Loompa! I want you to get me an Oompa-Loompa! I want an Oompa-Loompa right away! 
I want to take it home with me! Go on, Daddy! Get me an Oompa-Loompa!' 

'Now, now, my pet!' her father said to her, 'we mustn't interrupt Mr Wonka.' 
"But I want an Oompa-Loompa!' screamed Veruca. 
'All right, Veruca, all right. But I can't get it for you this second. Please be patient. I'll see 

  
  
you have one before the day is out.' 
  
'Augustus!'  shouted  Mrs  Gloop.  'Augustus,  sweetheart,  I  don't  think  you  had  better  do 
that.' Augustus Gloop, as you might have guessed, had quietly sneaked down to the edge of the 
river, and he was now kneeling on the riverbank, scooping hot melted chocolate into his mouth as 
fast as he could. 
  
17 
Augustus Gloop Goes up the Pipe 

 
  
When Mr Wonka turned round and saw what Augustus Gloop was doing, he cried out, 
'Oh, no! Please, Augustus, please! I beg of you not to do that. My chocolate must be untouched by 
human hands!' 
  
that river at once!' 

'Augustus!' called out Mrs Gloop. 'Didn't you hear what the man said? Come away from 

'Augustus,' cried Mr Wonka, hopping up and down and waggling his stick in the air, 'you 

'This stuff is fabulous!' said Augustus, taking not the slightest notice of his mother or Mr 

  
Wonka. 'Gosh, I need a bucket to drink it properly!' 
  
must come away. You are dirtying my chocolate!' 
  
'Augustus!' cried Mrs Gloop. 
  
'Augustus!' cried Mr Gloop. 
  
But Augustus was deaf to everything except the call of his enormous stomach. He was now 
lying full length on the ground with his head far out over the river, lapping up the chocolate like a 
dog. 
  
people all over the country!' 
'Be careful, Augustus!' shouted Mr Gloop. 'You're leaning too far out!' 
  
Mr Gloop was absolutely right. For suddenly there was a shriek, and then a splash, and 
  
into  the  river  went  Augustus  Gloop,  and  in  one  second  he  had  disappeared  under  the  brown 
surface. 
  
'He'll drown! He can't swim a yard! Save him! Save him!' 

'Augustus!' shouted Mrs Gloop. 'You'll be giving that nasty cold of yours to about a million 

'Save him!' screamed Mrs Gloop, going white in the face, and waving her umbrella about. 

'Good heavens, woman,' said Mr Gloop, 'I'm not diving in there! I've got my best suit on!' 
Augustus Gloop's face came up again to the surface, painted brown with chocolate. 'Help! 

  
Help! Help!' he yelled. 'Fish me out!' 
'Don't just stand there!' Mrs Gloop screamed at Mr Gloop. 'Do something!' 
  
  
'I  am  doing  something!'  said  Mr  Gloop,  who  was  now  taking  off  his  jacket  and  getting 
ready to dive into the chocolate. But while he was doing this, the wretched boy was being sucked 
closer and closer towards the mouth of one of the great pipes that was dangling down into the 
river. Then all at once, the powerful suction took hold of him completely, and he was pulled under 
the surface and then into the mouth of the pipe. 
  
  
  
seen shooting up inside it, head first, like a torpedo. 

The crowd on the riverbank waited breathlessly to see where he would come out. 
'There he goes!' somebody shouted, pointing upwards. 
And sure enough, because the pipe was made of glass, Augustus Gloop could be clearly 

'Help! Murder! Police!' screamed Mrs Gloop. 'Augustus, come back at once! Where are you 

'It's a wonder to me,' said Mr Gloop, 'how that pipe is big enough for him to go through it.' 
'It isn't big enough!' said Charlie Bucket. 'Oh dear, look! He's slowing down!' 
'So he is!' said Grandpa Joe. 
'He's going to stick!' said Charlie. 
'I think he is!' said Grandpa Joe. 
'By golly, he has stuck!' said Charlie. 
'It's his stomach that's done it!' said Mr Gloop. 
'He's blocked the whole pipe!' said Grandpa Joe. 
'Smash the pipe!' yelled Mrs Gloop, still waving her umbrella. 'Augustus, come out of there 

going?' 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
at once!' 
The watchers below could see the chocolate swishing around the boy in the pipe, and they 
  
could see it building up behind him in a solid mass, pushing against the blockage. The pressure 
was  terrific.  Something  had  to  give.  Something  did  give,  and  that  something  was  Augustus. 
WHOOF! Up he shot again like a bullet in the barrel of a gun. 
  
brigade!' 
  
'Keep calm!' cried Mr Wonka. 'Keep calm, my dear lady, keep calm. There is no danger! No 
danger  whatsoever!  Augustus  has  gone  on  a  little  journey,  that's  all.  A  most  interesting  little 
journey. But he'll come out of it just fine, you wait and see.' 

'He's  disappeared!'  yelled  Mrs  Gloop.  'Where  does  that  pipe  go  to?  Quick!  Call  the  fire 

'Impossible!'  cried  Mr  Wonka.  'Unthinkable!  Inconceivable!  Absurd!  He  could  never  be 

'How  can  he  possibly  come  out  just  fine!'  snapped  Mrs  Gloop.  'He'll  be  made  into 

  
marshmallows in five seconds!' 
  
made into marshmallows!' 
'And why not, may I ask?' shouted Mrs Gloop. 
  
  
'Because that pipe doesn't go anywhere near it! That pipe — the one Augustus went up — 
happens to lead directly to the room where I make a most delicious kind of strawberry-flavoured 
chocolate-coated fudge . . .' 
  
'Then  he'll  be  made  into  strawberry-flavoured  chocolate-coated  fudge!'  screamed  Mrs 
Gloop. 'My poor Augustus! They'll be selling him by the pound all over the country tomorrow 
morning!' 

doesn't think it's at all funny!' 
'You can say that again!' said Mrs Gloop. 
  
  
'Go straight to the Fudge Room,' Mr Wonka said to the Oompa-Loompa, 'and when you get 
there, take a long stick and start poking around inside the big chocolate-mixing barrel. I'm almost 
certain you'll find him in there. But you'd better look sharp! You'll have to hurry! If you leave him 
in the chocolate-mixing barrel too long, he's liable to get poured out into the fudge boiler, and that 
really would be a disaster, wouldn't it? My fudge would become quite uneatable!' 
  
  

Mrs Gloop let out a shriek of fury. 
'I'm joking,' said Mr Wonka, giggling madly behind his beard. 'I didn't mean it. Forgive me. 

'He'll be perfectly safe,' said Mr Wonka, giggling slightly. 
'He'll be chocolate fudge!' shrieked Mrs Gloop. 
'Never!' cried Mr Wonka. 
'Of course he will!' shrieked Mrs Gloop. 
'I wouldn't allow it!' cried Mr Wonka. 
'And why not?' shrieked Mrs Gloop. 
'Because the taste would be terrible,' said Mr Wonka. 'Just imagine it! Augustus-flavoured 

'Quite right,' said Mr Gloop. 
'I know I'm right,' said Mrs Gloop. 
  
'It's beyond a joke,' said Mr Gloop. 
  
  
'Mr Wonka doesn't seem to think so!' cried Mrs Gloop. 'Just look at him! He's laughing his 
head off! How dare you laugh like that when my boy's just gone up the pipe! You monster!' she 
shrieked, pointing her umbrella at Mr Wonka as though she were going to run him through. 'You 
think it's a joke, do you? You think that sucking my boy up into your Fudge Room like that is just 
one great big colossal joke?' 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
chocolate-coated Gloop! No one would buy it.' 
  
  
  
perfectly safe.' 
  
  
Immediately, an Oompa-Loompa appeared, as if from nowhere, and stood beside him. 
  
The Oompa-Loompa bowed and smiled, showing beautiful white teeth. His skin was rosy-
white, his long hair was golden-brown, and the top of his head came just above the height of Mr 
Wonka's knee. He wore the usual deerskin slung over his shoulder. 
  
'Now listen to me!' said Mr Wonka, looking down at the tiny man. 'I want you to take Mr 
and Mrs Gloop up to the Fudge Room and help them to find their son, Augustus. He's just gone 
up the pipe.' 
  

'They most certainly would!' cried Mr Gloop indignantly. 
'I don't want to think about it!' shrieked Mrs Gloop. 
'Nor  do  I,'  said  Mr  Wonka.  'And  I  do  promise  you,  madam,  that  your  darling  boy  is 

'If he's perfectly safe, then where is he?' snapped Mrs Gloop. 'Lead me to him this instant!' 
Mr  Wonka  turned  around  and  clicked  his  fingers  sharply,  click,  click,  click,  three  times. 

The Oompa-Loompa took one look at Mrs Gloop and exploded into peals of laughter. 
'Oh,  do  be  quiet!'  said  Mr  Wonka.  'Control  yourself!  Pull  yourself  together!  Mrs  Gloop 

I'm so sorry. Good-bye, Mrs Gloop! And Mr Gloop! Good-bye! I'll see you later . . .' 
  
As Mr and Mrs Gloop and their tiny escort hurried away, the five Oompa-Loompas on the 
far  side  of  the  river  suddenly  began  hopping  and  dancing  about  and  beating  wildly  upon  a 
number of very small drums. 'Augustus Gloop!' they chanted. 'Augustus Gloop! Augustus Gloop! 
Augustus Gloop!' 

'Grandpa!' cried Charlie. 'Listen to them, Grandpa! What are they doing?' 
'Ssshh!' whispered Grandpa Joe. 'I think they're going to sing us a song!' 

  
  
'Augustus Gloop!' chanted the Oompa-Loompas. 
'Augustus Gloop! Augustus Gloop! 
The great big greedy nincompoop! 
How long could we allow this beast 
To gorge and guzzle, feed and feast 
On everything he wanted to? 
Great Scott! It simply wouldn't do! 
However long this pig might live, 
We're positive he'd never give 
Even the smallest bit of fun 
Or happiness to anyone. 
So what we do in cases such 
As this, we use the gentle touch, 
And carefully we take the brat 
And turn him into something that 
Will give great pleasure to us all — 
A doll, for instance, or a ball, 
Or marbles or a rocking horse. 
But this revolting boy, of course, 
Was so unutterably vile, 
So greedy, foul, and infantile, 
He left a most disgusting taste 
Inside our mouths, and so in haste 
We chose a thing that, come what may, 
Would take the nasty taste away. 
"Come on!" we cried. "The time is ripe 
To send him shooting up the pipe! 
He has to go! It has to be!" 
And very soon, he's going to see 
Inside the room to which he's gone 
Some funny things are going on. 
But don't, dear children, be alarmed; 
Augustus Gloop will not be harmed, 
Although, of course, we must admit 
He will be altered quite a bit. 
He'll be quite changed from what he's been, 
When he goes through the fudge machine: 
Slowly, the wheels go round and round, 
The cogs begin to grind and pound; 
A hundred knives go slice, slice, slice; 
We add some sugar, cream, and spice; 
We boil him for a minute more, 
Until we're absolutely sure 

'I  told  you  they  loved  singing!'  cried  Mr  Wonka.  'Aren't  they  delightful?  Aren't  they 

'Are the Oompa-Loompas really joking, Grandpa?' asked Charlie. 
'Of  course  they're  joking,'  answered  Grandpa  Joe.  'They  must  be  joking.  At  least,  I  hope 

That all the greed and all the gall 
Is boiled away for once and all. 
Then out he comes! And now! By grace! 
A miracle has taken place! 
This boy, who only just before 
Was loathed by men from shore to shore, 
This greedy brute, this louse's ear, 
Is loved by people everywhere! 
For who could hate or bear a grudge 
Against a luscious bit of fudge?' 
  
  
  
charming? But you mustn't believe a word they said. It's all nonsense, every bit of it!' 
  
  
they're joking. Don't you?' 
  
18 
Down the Chocolate River 
 
  
'Off  we  go!'  cried  Mr  Wonka.  'Hurry  up,  everybody!  Follow  me  to  the  next  room!  And 
please don't worry about Augustus Gloop. He's bound to come out in the wash. They always do. 
We shall have to make the next part of the journey by boat! Here she comes! Look!' 
  
A steamy mist was rising up now from the great warm chocolate river, and out of the mist 
there appeared suddenly a most fantastic pink boat. It was a large open row boat with a tall front 
and a tall back (like a Viking boat of old), and it was of such a shining sparkling glistening pink 
colour that the whole thing looked as though it were made of bright, pink glass. There were many 
oars on either side of it, and as the boat came closer, the watchers on the riverbank could see that 
the oars were being pulled by masses of Oompa-Loompas — at least ten of them to each oar. 
  
'This  is  my  private  yacht!'  cried  Mr  Wonka,  beaming  with  pleasure.  'I  made  her  by 
hollowing out an enormous boiled sweet! Isn't she beautiful! See how she comes cutting through 
the river!' 
  
The  gleaming  pink  boiled-sweet  boat  glided  up  to  the  riverbank.  One  hundred  Oompa-
Loompas rested on their oars and stared up at the visitors. Then suddenly, for some reason best 
known to themselves, they all burst into shrieks of laughter. 
  
  
everything's a colossal joke! Jump into the boat, all of you! Come on! Hurry up!' 
  
bank and began to row swiftly downriver. 
  
tongue! It'll only make it sticky!' 

'What's so funny?' asked Violet Beauregarde. 
'Oh,  don't  worry  about  them!'  cried  Mr  Wonka.  'They're  always  laughing!  They  think 

As soon as everyone was safely in, the Oompa-Loompas pushed the boat away from the 

'Hey,  there!  Mike  Teavee!'  shouted  Mr  Wonka.  'Please  do  not  lick  the  boat  with  your 

'Daddy,' said Veruca Salt, 'I want a boat like this! I want you to buy me a big pink boiled-
sweet boat exactly like Mr Wonka's! And I want lots of Oompa-Loompas to row me about, and I 
want a chocolate river and I want . . . I want . . .' 
  
'She wants a good kick in the pants,' whispered Grandpa Joe to Charlie. The old man was 
sitting in the back of the boat and little Charlie Bucket was right beside him. Charlie was holding 
tightly on to his grandfather's bony old hand. He was in a whirl of excitement. Everything that he 
had seen so far — the great chocolate river, the waterfall, the huge sucking pipes, the minty sugar 
meadows, the Oompa-Loompas, the beautiful pink boat, and most of all, Mr Willy Wonka himself 

— had been so astonishing that he began to wonder whether there could possibly be any more 
astonishments left. Where were they going now? What were they going to see? And what in the 
world was going to happen in the next room? 
'Isn't it marvellous?' said Grandpa Joe, grinning at Charlie. 
  
Charlie nodded and smiled up at the old man. 
  
  
Suddenly,  Mr  Wonka,  who  was  sitting  on  Charlie's  other  side,  reached  down  into  the 
bottom of the boat, picked up a large mug, dipped it into the river, filled it with chocolate, and 
handed it to Charlie. 'Drink this,' he said. 'It'll do you good! You look starved to death!' 

Then Mr Wonka filled a second mug and gave it to Grandpa Joe. 'You, too,' he said. 'You 

'There's no knowing where they're going!' cried Mr Wonka, hooting with laughter. 

look like a skeleton! What's the matter? Hasn't there been anything to eat in your house lately?' 
'Not much,' said Grandpa Joe. 
  
  
Charlie put the mug to his lips, and as the rich warm creamy chocolate ran down his throat 
into  his  empty  tummy,  his  whole  body  from  head  to  toe  began  to  tingle  with  pleasure,  and  a 
feeling of intense happiness spread over him. 
'You like it?' asked Mr Wonka. 
  
'Oh, it's wonderful!' Charlie said. 
  
'The creamiest loveliest chocolate I've ever tasted!' said Grandpa Joe, smacking his lips. 
  
'That's because it's been mixed by waterfall,' Mr Wonka told him. 
  
  
The boat sped on down the river. The river was getting narrower. There was some kind of a 
dark tunnel ahead — a great round tunnel that looked like an enormous pipe — and the river was 
running right into the tunnel. And so was the boat! 'Row on!' shouted Mr Wonka, jumping up and 
waving his stick in the air. 'Full speed ahead!' And with the Oompa-Loompas rowing faster than 
ever, the boat shot into the pitch-dark tunnel, and all the passengers screamed with excitement. 
'How can they see where they're going?' shrieked Violet Beauregarde in the darkness. 
  
  
'There's no earthly way of knowing 
Which direction they are going! 
There's no knowing where they're rowing, 
Or which way the river's flowing! 
Not a speck of light is showing, 
So the danger must be growing, 
For the rowers keep on rowing, 
And they're certainly not showing 
Any signs that they are slowing . . .' 
  
  
  
the chorus of frightened shouting. 'He's crazy!' they shouted. 
  
'He's balmy!' 
  
'He's nutty!' 
 
'He's screwy!' 
  
'He's batty!' 
  
'He's dippy!' 
  
'He's dotty!' 

'He's gone off his rocker!' shouted one of the fathers, aghast, and the other parents joined in 

  
'He's daffy!' 
  
'He's goofy!' 
  
'He's beany!' 
  
'He's buggy!' 
  
'He's wacky!' 
  
'He's loony!' 
  
'No, he is not!' said Grandpa Joe. 
  
  
'Switch on the lights!' shouted Mr Wonka. And suddenly, on came the lights and the whole 
tunnel was brilliantly lit up, and Charlie could see that they were indeed inside a gigantic pipe, 
and the great upward-curving walls of the pipe were pure white and spotlessly clean. The river of 
chocolate  was  flowing  very  fast  inside  the  pipe,  and  the  Oompa-Loompas  were  all  rowing  like 
mad, and the boat was rocketing along at a furious pace. Mr Wonka was jumping up and down in 
the back of the boat and calling to the rowers to row faster and faster still. He seemed to love the 
sensation of whizzing through a white tunnel in a pink boat on a chocolate river, and he clapped 
his hands and laughed and kept glancing at his passengers to see if they were enjoying it as much 
as he. 
  
'Look, Grandpa!' cried Charlie. 'There's a door in the wall!' It was a green door and it was 
set into the wall of the tunnel just above the level of the river. As they flashed past it there was just 
enough  time  to  read  the  writing  on  the  door:  STOREROOM  NUMBER  54,  it  said.  ALL  THE 
CREAMS  —  DAIRY  CREAM,  WHIPPED  CREAM,  VIOLET  CREAM,  COFFEE  CREAM, 
PINEAPPLE CREAM, VANILLA CREAM, AND HAIR CREAM. 
  
  
  
SHAPES AND SIZES. 
'Whips!' cried Veruca Salt. 'What on earth do you use whips for?' 
  
  
'For  whipping  cream,  of  course,'  said  Mr  Wonka.  'How  can  you  whip  cream  without 
whips? Whipped cream isn't whipped cream at all unless it's been whipped with whips. Just as a 
poached egg isn't a poached egg unless it's been stolen from the woods in the dead of night! Row 
on, please!' 
  
BEANS, CACAO BEANS, COFFEE BEANS, JELLY BEANS, AND HAS BEANS. 
'Has beans?' cried Violet Beauregarde. 
  
  
'You're one yourself!' said Mr Wonka. 'There's no time for arguing! Press on, press on!' But 
five seconds later, when a bright red door came into sight ahead, he suddenly waved his gold-
topped cane in the air and shouted, 'Stop the boat!' 
  
19 
The Inventing Room — 
Everlasting Gobstoppers and Hair Toffee 
 

'Hair cream?' cried Mike Teavee. 'You don't use hair cream?' 
'Row on!' shouted Mr Wonka. 'There's no time to answer silly questions!' 
They streaked past a black door. STOREROOM NUMBER 71, it said on it. WHIPS — ALL 

They  passed  a  yellow  door  on  which  it  said:  STOREROOM  NUMBER  77  —  ALL  THE 

When Mr Wonka shouted 'Stop the boat!' the Oompa-Loompas jammed their oars into the 

river and backed water furiously. The boat stopped. 

  
The Oompa-Loompas guided the boat alongside the red door. On the door it said, INVENTING 
ROOM — PRIVATE — KEEP OUT. Mr Wonka took a key from his pocket, leaned over the side of 
the boat, and put the key in the keyhole. 

'This  is  the  most  important  room  in  the  entire  factory!'  he  said.  'All  my  most  secret  new 
inventions are cooking and simmering in here! Old Fickelgruber would give his front teeth to be 
allowed inside just for three minutes! So would Prodnose and Slugworth and all the other rotten 
chocolate makers! But now, listen to me! I want no messing about when you go in! No touching, 
no meddling, and no tasting! Is that agreed?' 
'Yes, yes!' the children cried. 'We won't touch a thing!' 
  
  
'Up  to  now,'  Mr  Wonka  said,  'nobody  else,  not  even  an  Oompa-Loompa,  has  ever  been 
allowed in here!' He opened the door and stepped out of the boat into the room. The four children 
and their parents all scrambled after him. 
'Don't touch!' shouted Mr Wonka. 'And don't knock anything over!' 
  
  
Charlie Bucket stared around the gigantic room in which he now found himself. The place 
was  like  a  witch's  kitchen!  All  about  him  black  metal  pots  were  boiling  and  bubbling  on  huge 
stoves, and kettles were hissing and pans were sizzling, and strange iron machines were clanking 
and spluttering, and there were pipes running all over the ceiling and walls, and the whole place 
was filled with smoke and steam and delicious rich smells. 
  
Mr Wonka himself had suddenly become even more excited than usual, and anyone could 
see that this was the room he loved best of all. He was hopping about among the saucepans and 
the machines like a child among his Christmas presents, not knowing which thing to look at first. 
He lifted the lid from a huge pot and took a sniff; then he rushed over and dipped a finger into a 
barrel of sticky yellow stuff and had a taste; then he skipped across to one of the machines and 
turned half a dozen knobs this way and that; then he peered anxiously through the glass door of a 
gigantic oven, rubbing his hands and cackling with delight at what he saw inside. Then he ran 
over  to  another  machine,  a  small  shiny  affair  that  kept  going  phut-phut-phut-phut-phut,  and 
every time it went phut, a large green marble dropped out of it into a basket on the floor. At least 
it looked like a marble. 
'Everlasting  Gobstoppers!'  cried  Mr  Wonka  proudly.  'They're  completely  new!  I  am 
  
inventing them for children who are given very little pocket money. You can put an Everlasting 
Gobstopper in your mouth and you can suck it and suck it and suck it and suck it and it will never 
get any smaller!' 
'It's like gum!' cried Violet Beauregarde. 
  
  
'It is not like gum,' Mr Wonka said. 'Gum is for chewing, and if you tried chewing one of 
these Gobstoppers here you'd break your teeth off! And they never get any smaller! They never 
disappear!  NEVER!  At  least  I  don't  think  they  do.  There's  one  of  them  being  tested  this  very 
moment in the Testing Room next door. An Oompa-Loompa is sucking it. He's been sucking it for 
very nearly a year now without stopping, and it's still just as good as ever! 

'Now, over here,' Mr Wonka went on, skipping excitedly across the room to the opposite 
wall,  'over  here  I  am  inventing  a  completely  new  line  in  toffees!'  He  stopped  beside  a  large 
saucepan.  The  saucepan  was  full  of  a  thick  gooey  purplish  treacle,  boiling  and  bubbling.  By 
standing on his toes, little Charlie could just see inside it. 
  
'That's Hair Toffee!' cried Mr Wonka. 'You eat just one tiny bit of that, and in exactly half an 
hour a brand-new luscious thick silky beautiful crop of hair will start growing out all over the top 
of your head! And a moustache! And a beard!' 
'A beard!' cried Veruca Salt. 'Who wants a beard, for heaven's sake?' 
  
  
'It would suit you very well,' said Mr Wonka, 'but unfortunately the mixture is not quite 
right yet. I've got it too strong. It works too well. I tried it on an Oompa-Loompa yesterday in the 
Testing Room and immediately a huge black beard started shooting out of his chin, and the beard 
grew so fast that soon it was trailing all over the floor in a thick hairy carpet. It was growing faster 

than we could cut it! In the end we had to use a lawn mower to keep it in check! But I'll get the 
mixture right soon! And when I do, then there'll be no excuse any more for little boys and girls 
going about with bald heads!' 
  

'But Mr Wonka,' said Mike Teavee, 'little boys and girls never do go about with . . .' 
'Don't  argue,  my  dear  child,  please  don't  argue!'  cried  Mr  Wonka.  'It's  such  a  waste  of 
precious time! Now, over here, if you will all step this way, I will show you something that I am 
terrifically proud of. Oh, do be careful! Don't knock anything over! Stand back!' 
  
20 
The Great Gum Machine 

 
Mr  Wonka  led  the  party  over  to  a  gigantic  machine  that  stood  in  the  very  centre  of  the 
  
Inventing Room. It was a mountain of gleaming metal that towered high above the children and 
their parents. Out of the very top of it there sprouted hundreds and hundreds of thin glass tubes, 
and the glass tubes all curled downwards and came together in a bunch and hung suspended over 
an enormous round tub as big as a bath. 
  
'Here  we  go!'  cried  Mr  Wonka,  and  he  pressed three different buttons on the side of the 
machine. A second later, a mighty rumbling sound came from inside it, and the whole machine 
began to shake most frighteningly, and steam began hissing out of it all over, and then suddenly 
the watchers noticed that runny stuff was pouring down the insides of all the hundreds of little 
glass tubes and squirting out into the great tub below. And in every single tube the runny stuff 
was of a different colour, so that all the colours of the rainbow (and many others as well) came 
sloshing and splashing into the tub. It was a lovely sight. And when the tub was nearly full, Mr 
Wonka  pressed  another  button,  and  immediately  the  runny  stuff  disappeared,  and  a  whizzing 
whirring  noise  took  its  place;  and  then  a  giant  whizzer  started  whizzing  round  inside  the 
enormous tub, mixing up all the different coloured liquids like an ice-cream soda. Gradually, the 
mixture began to froth. It became frothier and frothier, and it turned from blue to white to green to 
brown to yellow, then back to blue again. 
'Watch!' said Mr Wonka. 
  
Click went the machine, and the whizzer stopped whizzing. And now there came a sort of 
  
sucking noise, and very quickly all the blue frothy mixture in the huge basin was sucked back into 
the stomach of the machine. There was a moment of silence. Then a few queer rumblings were 
heard. Then silence again. Then suddenly, the machine let out a monstrous mighty groan, and at 
the same moment a tiny drawer (no bigger than the drawer in a slot machine) popped out of the 
side  of  the  machine,  and  in  the  drawer  there  lay  something  so  small  and  thin  and  grey  that 
everyone thought it must be a mistake. The thing looked like a little strip of grey cardboard. 
  
  
  

The children and their parents stared at the little grey strip lying in the drawer. 
'You mean that's all?' said Mike Teavee, disgusted. 
'That's all,' answered Mr Wonka, gazing proudly at the result. 'Don't you know what it is?' 
There was a pause. Then suddenly, Violet Beauregarde, the silly gum-chewing girl, let out a 

'This gum,' Mr Wonka went on, 'is my latest, my greatest, my most fascinating invention! 
It's a chewing-gum meal! It's . . . it's . . . it's . . . That tiny little strip of gum lying there is a whole 
three-course dinner all by itself!' 
   

'What sort of nonsense is this?' said one of the fathers. 

'Right you are!' cried Mr Wonka, slapping Violet hard on the back. 'It's a stick of gum! It's a 

yell of excitement. 'By gum, it's gum!' she shrieked. 'It's a stick of chewing-gum!' 
  
stick of the most amazing and fabulous and sensational gum in the world!' 
  
21 
Good-bye Violet 
 

'What  do  you  mean,  it's  tomato  soup,  roast  beef,  and  blueberry  pie?'  said  Violet 

  
'My dear sir!' cried Mr Wonka, 'when I start selling this gum in the shops it will change 
everything! It will be the end of all kitchens and all cooking! There will be no more shopping to 
do!  No  more  buying  of  meat  and  groceries!  There'll  be  no  knives  and  forks  at  mealtimes!  No 
plates! No washing up! No rubbish! No mess! Just a little strip of Wonka's magic chewing-gum — 
and that's all you'll ever need at breakfast, lunch, and supper! This piece of gum I've just made 
happens to be tomato soup, roast beef, and blueberry pie, but you can have almost anything you 
want!' 
  
Beauregarde. 
  
'If you were to start chewing it,' said Mr Wonka, 'then that is exactly what you would get on 
the menu. It's absolutely amazing! You can actually feel the food going down your throat and into 
your tummy! And you can taste it perfectly! And it fills you up! It satisfies you! It's terrific!' 
'It's utterly impossible,' said Veruca Salt. 
  
  
'Just so long as it's gum,' shouted Violet Beauregarde, 'just so long as it's a piece of gum and 
I can chew it, then that's for me!' And quickly she took her own world-record piece of chewing-
gum out of her mouth and stuck it behind her left ear. 'Come on, Mr Wonka,' she said, 'hand over 
this magic gum of yours and we'll see if the thing works.' 
  
  
  
right yet. There are still one or two things . . .' 

'Now, Violet,' said Mrs Beauregarde, her mother; 'don't let's do anything silly, Violet.' 
'I want the gum!' Violet said obstinately. 'What's so silly?' 
'I would rather you didn't take it,' Mr Wonka told her gently. 'You see, I haven't got it quite 

'Don't!' said Mr Wonka. 
'Fabulous!' shouted Violet. 'It's tomato soup! It's hot and creamy and delicious! I can feel it 

'Oh, to blazes with that!' said Violet, and suddenly, before Mr Wonka could stop her, she 
shot out a fat hand and grabbed the stick of gum out of the little drawer and popped it into her 
mouth. At once, her huge, well-trained jaws started chewing away on it like a pair of tongs. 
  
  
running down my throat!' 
'Stop!' said Mr Wonka. 'The gum isn't ready yet! It's not right!' 
  
'Of course it's right!' said Violet. 'It's working beautifully! Oh my, what lovely soup this is!' 
  
'Spit it out!' said Mr Wonka. 
  
  
'It's  changing!'  shouted  Violet,  chewing  and  grinning  both  at  the  same  time.  'The  second 
course is coming up! It's roast beef! It's tender and juicy! Oh boy, what a flavour! The baked potato 
is marvellous, too! It's got a crispy skin and it's all filled with butter inside!' 
  
  

'But how in-teresting, Violet,' said Mrs Beauregarde. 'You are a clever girl.' 
'Keep chewing, baby!' said Mr Beauregarde. 'Keep right on chewing! 
This is a great day for the Beauregardes! Our little girl is the first person in the world to 

have a chewing-gum meal!' 
  
Everybody was watching Violet Beauregarde as she stood there chewing this extraordinary 
gum. Little Charlie Bucket was staring at her absolutely spellbound, watching her huge rubbery 
lips as they pressed and unpressed with the chewing, and Grandpa Joe stood beside him, gaping 
at the girl. Mr Wonka was wringing his hands and saying, 'No, no, no, no, no! It isn't ready for 
eating! It isn't right! You mustn't do it!' 
'Blueberry pie and cream!' shouted Violet. 'Here it comes! Oh my, it's perfect! It's beautiful! 
  
It's . . . it's exactly as though I'm swallowing it! It's as though I'm chewing and swallowing great 
big spoonfuls of the most marvellous blueberry pie in the world!' 
  
happening to your nose!' 
  
  
  
  

'Oh, be quiet, mother, and let me finish!' said Violet. 
'It's turning blue!' screamed Mrs Beauregarde. 'Your nose is turning blue as a blueberry!' 
'Your mother is right!' shouted Mr Beauregarde. 'Your whole nose has gone purple!' 
'What do you mean?' said Violet, still chewing away. 

'Good  heavens,  girl!'  shrieked  Mrs  Beauregarde  suddenly,  staring  at  Violet,  'what's 

'It always goes wrong when we come to the dessert,' sighed Mr Wonka. 'It's the blueberry 

'Your cheeks!' screamed Mrs Beauregarde. 'They're turning blue as well! So is your chin! 

'Spit that gum out at once!' ordered Mr Beauregarde. 
'Mercy! Save us!' yelled Mrs Beauregarde. 'The girl's going blue and purple all over! Even 

Your whole face is turning blue!' 
  
  
her hair is changing colour! Violet, you're turning violet, Violet! What is happening to you?' 
'I told you I hadn't got it quite right,' sighed Mr Wonka, shaking his head sadly. 
  
'I'll say you haven't!' cried Mrs Beauregarde. 'Just look at the girl now!' 
  
  
Everybody was staring at Violet. And what a terrible, peculiar sight she was! Her face and 
hands and legs and neck, in fact the skin all over her body, as well as her great big mop of curly 
hair, had turned a brilliant, purplish-blue, the colour of blueberry juice! 
  
pie that does it. But I'll get it right one day, you wait and see.' 
  
  

'Violet,' screamed Mrs Beauregarde, 'you're swelling up!' 
'I feel sick,' Violet said. 
'You're swelling up!' screamed Mrs Beauregarde again. 
'I feel most peculiar!' gasped Violet. 
  
'I'm not surprised!' said Mr Beauregarde. 
  
'Great heavens, girl!' screeched Mrs Beauregarde. 'You're blowing up like a balloon!' 
  
'Like a blueberry,' said Mr Wonka. 
  
'Call a doctor!' shouted Mr Beauregarde. 
  
'Prick her with a pin!' said one of the other fathers. 
  
'Save her!' cried Mrs Beauregarde, wringing her hands. 
  
But there was no saving her now. Her body was swelling up and changing shape at such a 
  
rate that within a minute it had turned into nothing less than an enormous round blue ball — a 
gigantic blueberry, in fact — and all that remained of Violet Beauregarde herself was a tiny pair of 
legs and a tiny pair of arms sticking out of the great round fruit and little head on top. 
  
'It  always  happens  like  that,'  sighed  Mr  Wonka.  'I've  tried  it  twenty  times  in  the  Testing 
Room on twenty Oompa-Loompas, and every one of them finished up as a blueberry. It's most 
annoying. I just can't understand it.' 
  
she was this instant!' 
  
  
Room at once.' 
'The Juicing Room?' cried Mrs Beauregarde. 'What are they going to do to her there?' 
  
  
'Squeeze her,' said Mr Wonka. 'We've got to squeeze the juice out of her immediately. After 
that, we'll just have to see how she comes out. But don't worry, my dear Mrs Beauregarde. We'll 
get her repaired if it's the last thing we do. I am sorry about it all, I really am . . .' 
  
Already the ten Oompa-Loompas were rolling the enormous blueberry across the floor of 
the Inventing Room towards the door that led to the chocolate river where the boat was waiting. 
Mr and Mrs Beauregarde hurried after them. The rest of the party, including little Charlie Bucket 
and Grandpa Joe, stood absolutely still and watched them go. 

Mr Wonka clicked his fingers, and ten Oompa-Loompas appeared immediately at his side. 
'Roll Miss Beauregarde into the boat,' he said to them, 'and take her along to the Juicing 

'But I don't want a blueberry for a daughter!' yelled Mrs Beauregarde. 'Put her back to what 

'Listen!' whispered Charlie. 'Listen, Grandpa! The Oompa-Loompas in the boat outside are 

The voices, one hundred of them singing together, came loud and clear into the room: 

starting to sing!' 
  
  
'Dear friends, we surely all agree 
There's almost nothing worse to see 
Than some repulsive little bum 
Who's always chewing chewing-gum. 
(It's very near as bad as those 

Who sit around and pick the nose.) 
So please believe us when we say 
That chewing gum will never pay; 
This sticky habit's bound to send 
The chewer to a sticky end. 
Did any of you ever know 
A person called Miss Bigelow? 
This dreadful woman saw no wrong 
In chewing, chewing all day long. 
She chewed while bathing in the tub, 
She chewed while dancing at her club, 
She chewed in church and on the bus; 
It really was quite ludicrous! 
And when she couldn't find her gum, 
She'd chew up the linoleum, 
Or anything that happened near — 
A pair of boots, the postman's ear, 
Or other people's underclothes, 
And once she chewed her boy-friend's nose. 
She went on chewing till, at last, 
Her chewing muscles grew so vast 
That from her face her giant chin 
Stuck out just like a violin. 
For years and years she chewed away, 
Consuming fifty bits a day, 
Until one summer's eve, alas, 
A horrid business came to pass. 
Miss Bigelow went late to bed, 
For half an hour she lay and read, 
Chewing and chewing all the while 
Like some great clockwork crocodile. 
At last, she put her gum away 
Upon a special little tray, 
And settled back and went to sleep — 
(She managed this by counting sheep). 
But now, how strange! Although she slept, 
Those massive jaws of hers still kept 
On chewing, chewing through the night, 
Even with nothing there to bite. 
They were, you see, in such a groove 
They positively had to move. 
And very grim it was to hear 
In pitchy darkness, loud and clear, 
This sleeping woman's great big trap 
Opening and shutting, snap-snap-snap! 
Faster and faster, chop-chop-chop, 
The noise went on, it wouldn't stop. 
Until at last her jaws decide 
To pause and open extra wide, 
And with the most tremendous chew 
They bit the lady's tongue in two. 

'But Mr Wonka,' said Charlie Bucket anxiously, 'will Violet Beauregarde ever be all right 

'They'll de-juice her in no time flat!' declared Mr Wonka. 'They'll roll her into the de-juicing 

'If you think gum is so disgusting,' said Mike Teavee, 'then why do you make it in your 

'Well, well, well,' sighed Mr Willy Wonka, 'two naughty little children gone. Three good 

'But will she still be blue all over?' asked Charlie. 
'She'll be purple? cried Mr Wonka. 'A fine rich purple from head to toe! But there you are! 

Thereafter, just from chewing gum, 
Miss Bigelow was always dumb, 
And spent her life shut up in some 
Disgusting sanatorium. 
And that is why we'll try so hard 
To save Miss Violet Beauregarde 
From suffering an equal fate. 
She's still quite young. It's not too late, 
Provided she survives the cure. 
We hope she does. We can't be sure.' 
  
22 
Along the Corridor 
 
  
little children left. I think we'd better get out of this room quickly before we lose anyone else!' 
  
again or will she always be a blueberry?' 
  
machine, and she'll come out just as thin as a whistle!' 
  
  
That's what comes from chewing disgusting gum all day long!' 
  
factory?' 
  
'I do wish you wouldn't mumble,' said Mr Wonka. 'I can't hear a word you're saying. Come 
on! Off we go! Hurry up! Follow me! We're going into the corridors again!' And so saying, Mr 
Wonka scuttled across to the far end of the Inventing Room and went out through a small secret 
door hidden behind a lot of pipes and stoves. The three remaining children — Veruca Salt, Mike 
Teavee, and Charlie Bucket — together with the five remaining grown-ups, followed after him. 
  
Charlie Bucket saw that they were now back in one of those long pink corridors with many 
other pink corridors leading out of it. Mr Wonka was rushing along in front, turning left and right 
and right and left, and Grandpa Joe was saying, 'Keep a good hold of my hand, Charlie. It would 
be terrible to get lost in here.' 
  
Mr Wonka was saying, 'No time for any more messing about! We'll never get anywhere at 
the rate we've been going!' And on he rushed, down the endless pink corridors, with his black top 
hat perched on the top of his head and his plum-coloured velvet coat-tails flying out behind him 
like a flag in the wind. 
They passed a door in the wall. 'No time to go in!' shouted Mr Wonka. 'Press on! Press on!' 
  
They passed another door, then another and another. There were doors every twenty paces 
  
or so along the corridor now, and they all had something written on them, and strange clanking 
noises were coming from behind several of them, and delicious smells came wafting through the 
keyholes, and sometimes little jets of coloured steam shot out from the cracks underneath. 
  
Grandpa Joe and Charlie were half running and half walking to keep up with Mr Wonka, 
but they were able to read what it said on quite a few of the doors as they hurried by. EATABLE 
MARSHMALLOW PILLOWS, it said on one. 
  
rage when I get them into the shops! No time to go in, though! No time to go in!' 

'Marshmallow pillows are terrific!' shouted Mr Wonka as he dashed by. 'They'll be all the 

LICKABLE WALLPAPER FOR NURSERIES, it said on the next door. 
'Lovely stuff, lickable wallpaper!' cried Mr Wonka, rushing past. 'It has pictures of fruits on 

  
it — bananas, apples, oranges, grapes, pineapples, strawberries, and snozzberries . . .' 

'Snozzberries?' said Mike Teavee. 
  
  
'Don't interrupt!' said Mr Wonka. 'The wallpaper has pictures of all these fruits printed on 
it, and when you lick the picture of a banana, it tastes of banana. When you lick a strawberry, it 
tastes of strawberry. And when you lick a snozzberry, it tastes just exactly like a snozzberry . . .' 
'But what does a snozzberry taste like?' 
  
'You're mumbling again,' said Mr Wonka. 'Speak louder next time. On we go! Hurry up!' 
  
HOT ICE CREAMS FOR COLD DAYS, it said on the next door. 
  
  
'Extremely useful in the winter,' said Mr Wonka, rushing on. 'Hot ice cream warms you up 
no end in freezing weather. I also make hot ice cubes for putting in hot drinks. Hot ice cubes make 
hot drinks hotter.' 

COWS THAT GIVE CHOCOLATE MILK, it said on the next door. 
'Ah, my pretty little cows!' cried Mr Wonka. 'How I love those cows!' 
'But why can't we see them?' asked Veruca Salt. 'Why do we have to go rushing on past all 

  
  
these lovely rooms?' 
  
'We shall stop in time!' called out Mr Wonka. 'Don't be so madly impatient!' 
  
FIZZY LIFTING DRINKS, it said on the next door. 
  
'Oh, those are fabulous!' cried Mr Wonka. 'They fill you with bubbles, and the bubbles are 
full of a special kind of gas, and this gas is so terrifically lifting that it lifts you right off the ground 
just like a balloon, and up you go until your head hits the ceiling — and there you stay.' 
'But how do you come down again?' asked little Charlie. 
  
  
'You  do  a  burp,  of  course,'  said  Mr  Wonka.  'You  do  a  great  big  long  rude  burp,  and  up 
comes the gas and down comes you! But don't drink it outdoors! There's no knowing how high up 
you'll be carried if you do that. I gave some to an old Oompa-Loompa once out in the back yard 
and he went up and up and disappeared out of sight! It was very sad. I never saw him again.' 

'He should have burped,' Charlie said. 
  
'Of course he should have burped,' said Mr Wonka. 'I stood there shouting, "Burp, you silly 
ass, burp, or you'll never come down again!" But he didn't or couldn't or wouldn't, I don't know 
which. Maybe he was too polite. He must be on the moon by now.' 
  
  
that look round. Let's take a peek.' 
  
23 
Square Sweets That Look Round 

On the next door, it said, SQUARE SWEETS THAT LOOK ROUND. 
'Wait!' cried Mr Wonka, skidding suddenly to a halt. 'I am very proud of my square sweets 

 
  
Everybody stopped and crowded to the door. The top half of the door was made of glass. 
Grandpa Joe lifted Charlie up so that he could get a better view, and looking in, Charlie saw a long 
table, and on the table there were rows and rows of small white square-shaped sweets. The sweets 
looked very much like square sugar lumps — except that each of them had a funny little pink face 
painted on one side. At the end of the table, a number of Oompa-Loompas were busily painting 
more faces on more sweets. 
  

'There you are!' cried Mr Wonka. 'Square sweets that look round!' 
'They don't look round to me,' said Mike Teavee. 
'They look square,' said Veruca Salt. 'They look completely square.' 
'But they are square,' said Mr Wonka. 'I never said they weren't.' 
'You said they were round!' said Veruca Salt. 
'I never said anything of the sort,' said Mr Wonka. 'I said they looked round.' 
'But they don't look round!' said Veruca Salt.' They look square!' 
'They look round,' insisted Mr Wonka. 
'They most certainly do not look round!' cried Veruca Salt. 
'Veruca, darling,' said Mrs Salt, 'pay no attention to Mr Wonka! He's lying to you!' 

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

'By golly, he's right!' said Grandpa Joe. 
'Come on!' said Mr Wonka, starting off down the corridor again. 'On we go! We mustn't 

BUTTERSCOTCH AND BUTTERGIN, it said on the next door they passed. 
'Now that sounds a bit more interesting,' said Mr Salt, Veruca's father. 
'Glorious stuff!' said Mr Wonka. 'The Oompa-Loompas all adore it. It makes them tiddly. 

'My dear old fish,' said Mr Wonka, 'go and boil your head!' 
  
'How dare you speak to me like that!' shouted Mrs Salt. 
  
'Oh, do shut up,' said Mr Wonka. 'Now watch this!' 
  
  
He took a key from his pocket, and unlocked the door, and flung it open . . . and suddenly . 
. . at the sound of the door opening, all the rows of little square sweets looked quickly round to see 
who was coming in. The tiny faces actually turned towards the door and stared at Mr Wonka. 
  
it! They are square sweets that look round!' 
  
  
dawdle!' 
  
  
  
Listen! You can hear them in there now, whooping it up.' 
  
Shrieks of laughter and snatches of singing could be heard coming through the closed door. 
  
'They're  drunk  as  lords,'  said  Mr  Wonka.  'They're  drinking  butter  scotch  and  soda.  They 
like that best of all. Buttergin and tonic is also very popular. Follow me, please! We really mustn't 
keep stopping like this.' He turned left. He turned right. They came to a long flight of stairs. Mr 
Wonka slid down the banisters. The three children did the same. Mrs Salt and Mrs Teavee, the 
only  women  now  left  in  the  party,  were  getting  very  out  of  breath.  Mrs  Salt  was  a  great  fat 
creature  with  short  legs,  and  she  was  blowing  like  a  rhinoceros.  'This  way!'  cried  Mr  Wonka, 
turning left at the bottom of the stairs. 
  
  
  
  
  
24 
Veruca in the Nut Room 
 

'Go slower!' panted Mrs Salt. 
'Impossible,' said Mr Wonka. 'We should never get there in time if I did.' 
'Get where?' asked Veruca Salt. 
'Never you mind,' said Mr Wonka. 'You just wait and see.' 

'There you are!' he cried triumphantly. 'They're looking round! There's no argument about 

Mr Wonka rushed on down the corridor. THE NUT ROOM, it said on the next door they 

came to. 
  
'All right,' said Mr Wonka, 'stop here for a moment and catch your breath, and take a peek 
through the glass panel of this door. But don't go in! Whatever you do, don't go into THE NUT 
ROOM! If you go in, you'll disturb the squirrels!' 
Everyone crowded around the door. 
  
'Oh look, Grandpa, look!' cried Charlie. 
  
'Squirrels!' shouted Veruca Salt. 
  
'Crikey!' said Mike Teavee. 
  
  
It  was  an  amazing  sight.  One  hundred  squirrels  were  seated  upon  high  stools  around  a 
large table. On the table, there were mounds and mounds of walnuts, and the squirrels were all 
working away like mad, shelling the walnuts at a tremendous speed. 
  
explained. 
  
'Why use squirrels?' Mike Teavee asked. 'Why not use Oompa-Loompas?' 
  
'Because,' said Mr Wonka, 'Oompa-Loompas can't get walnuts out of walnut shells in one 
piece.  They  always  break  them  in  two.  Nobody  except  squirrels  can  get  walnuts  whole  out  of 
walnut  shells  every  time.  It  is  extremely  difficult.  But  in  my  factory,  I  insist  upon  only  whole 
walnuts. Therefore I have to have squirrels to do the job. Aren't they wonderful, the way they get 
those nuts out! And see how they first tap each walnut with their knuckles to be sure it's not a bad 

'These  squirrels  are  specially  trained  for  getting  the  nuts  out  of  walnuts,'  Mr  Wonka 

'All right, my pet,' Mrs Salt said soothingly. 'Mummy'll get you a squirrel just as soon as she 

'Hey, Mummy!' shouted Veruca Salt suddenly, 'I've decided I want a squirrel! Get me one 

one! If it's bad, it makes a hollow sound, and they don't bother to open it. They just throw it down 
the rubbish chute. There! Look! Watch that squirrel nearest to us! I think he's got a bad one now!' 
They watched the little squirrel as he tapped the walnut shell with his knuckles. He cocked 
  
his head to one side, listening intently, then suddenly he threw the nut over his shoulder into a 
large hole in the floor. 
  
of those squirrels!' 
'Don't be silly, sweetheart,' said Mrs Salt. 'These all belong to Mr Wonka.' 
  
  
'I don't care about that!' shouted Veruca. 'I want one. All I've got at home is two dogs and 
four cats and six bunny rabbits and two parakeets and three canaries and a green parrot and a 
turtle and a bowl of goldfish and a cage of white mice and a silly old hamster! I want a squirrel!' 
  
possibly can.' 
  

'They're not for sale,' Mr Wonka answered. 'She can't have one.' 
'Who says I can't!' shouted Veruca. 'I'm going in to get myself one this very minute!' 
'Don't!' said Mr Wonka quickly, but he was too late. The girl had already thrown open the 

'But I don't want any old squirrel!' Veruca shouted. 'I want a trained squirrel!' 
At  this  point,  Mr  Salt,  Veruca's  father,  stepped  forward.  'Very  well,  Wonka,'  he  said 
importantly, taking out a wallet full of money, 'how much d'you want for one of these squirrels? 
Name your price.' 
  
  
  
door and rushed in. 
  
and turned their heads and stared at her with small black beady eyes. 
  
Veruca Salt stopped also, and stared back at them. Then her gaze fell upon a pretty little 
squirrel sitting nearest to her at the end of the table. The squirrel was holding a walnut in its paws. 
  
'All right,' Veruca said, 'I'll have you!' 
  
She reached out her hands to grab the squirrel . . . but as she did so . . . in that first split 
second when her hands started to go forward, there was a sudden flash of movement in the room, 
like  a  flash  of  brown  lightning,  and  every  single  squirrel  around  the  table  took  a  flying  leap 
towards her and landed on her body. 

The moment she entered the room, one hundred squirrels stopped what they were doing 

Twenty-five of them caught hold of her right arm, and pinned it down. 
Twenty-five more caught hold of her left arm, and pinned that down. 
Twenty-five caught hold of her right leg and anchored it to the ground. 
Twenty-four caught hold of her left leg. 
And  the  one  remaining  squirrel  (obviously  the  leader  of  them  all)  climbed  up  on  to  her 

  
  
  
  
shoulder and started tap-tap-tapping the wretched girl's head with its knuckles. 
  
  
  
squirrel on her shoulder went tap-tap-tapping the side of her head with his knuckles. 
  
the floor. 

'Save her!' screamed Mrs Salt. 'Veruca! Come back! What are they doing to her?' 
'They're testing her to see if she's a bad nut,' said Mr Wonka. 'You watch.' 
Veruca  struggled  furiously,  but  the  squirrels  held  her  tight  and  she  couldn't  move.  The 

Then all at once, the squirrels pulled Veruca to the ground and started carrying her across 

'My goodness, she is a bad nut after all,' said  Mr  Wonka.  'Her  head  must  have  sounded 

quite hollow.' 
  
she couldn't escape. 
  
  
chute.' 
  
daughter. 

Veruca kicked and screamed, but it was no use. The tiny strong paws held her tightly and 

'Where are they taking her?' shrieked Mrs Salt. 
'She's  going  where  all  the  other  bad  nuts  go,'  said  Mr  Willy  Wonka.  'Down  the  rubbish 

'By golly, she is going down the chute!' said Mr Salt, staring through the glass door at his 

'Then save her!' cried Mrs Salt. 
'Too late,' said Mr Wonka. 'She's gone!' 
And indeed she had. 
'But where?' shrieked Mrs Salt, flapping her arms. 'What happens to the bad nuts? Where 

  
  
  
  
does the chute go to?' 
  
'That particular chute,' Mr Wonka told her, 'runs directly into the great big main rubbish 
pipe which carries away all the rubbish from every part of the factory — all the floor sweepings 
and potato peelings and rotten cabbages and fish heads and stuff like that.' 

'A chance!' yelled Mrs Salt. 'My darling Veruca! She'll . . . she'll . . . she'll be sizzled like a 

Hearing this, both Mr and Mrs Salt dashed into the Nut Room and ran over to the hole in 

'Who eats fish and cabbage and potatoes in this factory, I'd like to know?' said Mike Teavee. 
'I do, of course,' answered Mr Wonka. 'You don't think I live on cacao beans, do you?' 
'But . . . but . . . but . . .' shrieked Mrs Salt, 'where does the great big pipe go to in the end?' 
'Why, to the furnace, of course,' Mr Wonka said calmly. 'To the incinerator.' 
Mrs Salt opened her huge red mouth and started to scream. 
'Don't worry,' said Mr Wonka, 'there's always a chance that they've decided not to light it 

  
  
  
  
  
today.' 
  
sausage!' 
  
'Quite right, my dear,' said Mr Salt. 'Now see here, Wonka,' he added, 'I think you've gone 
just a shade too far this time, I do indeed. My daughter may be a bit of a frump — I don't mind 
admitting it — but that doesn't mean you can roast her to a crisp. I'll have you know I'm extremely 
cross about this, I really am.' 
  
'Oh, don't be cross, my dear sir!' said Mr Wonka. 'I expect she'll turn up again sooner or 
later.  She  may  not  even  have  gone  down  at  all.  She  may  be  stuck  in  the  chute  just  below  the 
entrance hole, and if that's the case, all you'll have to do is go in and pull her up again.' 
  
the floor and peered in. 
'Veruca!' shouted Mrs Salt. 'Are you down there!' 
  
There was no answer. 
  
  
Mrs Salt bent further forward to get a closer look. She was now kneeling right on the edge 
of  the  hole  with  her  head  down  and  her  enormous  behind  sticking  up  in  the  air  like  a  giant 
mushroom.  It  was  a  dangerous  position  to  be  in.  She  needed  only  one  tiny  little  push  .  .  .  one 
gentle  nudge  in  the  right  place  .  .  .  and  that  is  exactly  what  the  squirrels  gave  her!  Over  she 
toppled, into the hole head first, screeching like a parrot. 
  
'Good gracious me!' said Mr Salt, as he watched his fat wife go tumbling down the hole, 
'what  a  lot  of  rubbish  there's  going  to  be  today!'  He  saw  her  disappearing  into  the  darkness. 
'What's it like down there, Angina?' he called out. He leaned further forward. 
  
  
  
done before him — and his daughter. 
  
earth's going to happen to them now?' 
  
  
  
they let it go out. You never know . . . they might be lucky . . .' 
  
  
  
  
 'Veruca Salt!' sang the Oompa-Loompas. 

'I expect someone will catch them at the bottom of the chute,' said Mr Wonka. 
'But what about the great fiery incinerator?' asked Charlie. 
'They only light it every other day,' said Mr Wonka. 'Perhaps this is one of the days when 

'Ssshh!' said Grandpa Joe. 'Listen! Here comes another song!' 
From far away down the corridor came the beating of drums. Then the singing began. 

The squirrels rushed up behind him . . . 
'Help!' he shouted. 
But  he  was  already  toppling  forward,  and  down  the  chute  he  went,  just  as  his  wife  had 

'Oh  dear!'  cried  Charlie,  who  was  watching  with  the  others  through  the  door,  'what  on 

'Veruca Salt, the little brute, 
Has just gone down the rubbish chute 
(And as we very rightly thought 
That in a case like this we ought 
To see the thing completely through, 
We've polished off her parents, too). 
Down goes Veruca! Down the drain! 
And here, perhaps, we should explain 
That she will meet, as she descends, 
A rather different set of friends 
To those that she has left behind — 
These won't be nearly so refined. 
A fish head, for example, cut 
This morning from a halibut. 
"Hello! Good morning! How d'you do? 
How nice to meet you! How are you?" 
And then a little further down 
A mass of others gather round: 
A bacon rind, some rancid lard, 
A loaf of bread gone stale and hard, 
A steak that nobody could chew, 
An oyster from an oyster stew, 
Some liverwurst so old and grey 
One swelled it from a mile away, 
A rotten nut, a reeky pear, 
A thing the cat left on the stair, 
And lots of other things as well, 
Each with a rather horrid smell. 
These are Veruca's new-found friends 
That she will meet as she descends, 
And this is the price she has to pay 
For going so very far astray. 
But now, my dears, we think you might 
Be wondering — is it really right 
That every single bit of blame 
And all the scolding and the shame 
Should fall upon Veruca Salt? 
Is she the only one at fault? 
For though she's spoiled, and dreadfully so, 
A girl can't spoil herself, you know. 
Who spoiled her, then? Ah, who indeed? 
Who pandered to her every need? 
Who turned her into such a brat? 
Who are the culprits? Who did that? 
Alas! You needn't look so far 
To find out who these sinners are. 
They are (and this is very sad) 
Her loving parents, MUM and DAD. 
And that is why we're glad they fell 
Into the rubbish chute as well.' 
  

'I've  never  seen  anything  like  it!'  cried  Mr  Wonka.  'The  children  are  disappearing  like 

25 
The Great Glass Lift 
 
  
rabbits! But you mustn't worry about it! They'll all come out in the wash!' 
  
Mr Wonka looked at the little group that stood beside him in the corridor. There were only 
two children left now — Mike Teavee and Charlie Bucket. And there were three grown-ups, Mr 
and Mrs Teavee and Grandpa Joe. 'Shall we move on?' Mr Wonka asked. 
'Oh, yes!' cried Charlie and Grandpa Joe, both together. 
  
'My feet are getting tired,' said Mike Teavee. 'I want to watch television.' 
  
  
'If you're tired then we'd better take the lift,' said Mr Wonka. 'It's over here. Come on! In we 
go!'  He  skipped  across  the  passage  to  a  pair  of  double  doors.  The  doors  slid  open.  The  two 
children and the grown-ups went in. 
'Now then,' cried Mr Wonka, 'which button shall we press first? Take your pick!' 
  
  
Charlie Bucket stared around him in astonishment. This was the craziest lift he had ever 
seen. There were buttons everywhere! The walls, and even the ceiling, were covered all over with 
rows and rows and rows of small, black push buttons! There must have been a thousand of them 
on  each  wall,  and  another  thousand  on  the  ceiling!  And  now  Charlie  noticed  that  every  single 
button  had  a  tiny  printed  label  beside  it  telling  you  which  room  you  would  be  taken  to  if  you 
pressed it. 
  
'This isn't just an ordinary up-and-down lift!' announced Mr Wonka proudly. 'This lift can 
go sideways and longways and slantways and any other way you can think of! It can visit any 
single room in the whole factory, no matter where it is! You simply press the button . . . and zing! . 
. . you're off!' 
  
the rows of buttons. 
  
floor, everything is made of glass so that you can see out!' 
  
  
your pick! Hurry up! In every room, something delicious and wonderful is being made.' 
  
  
THE ROCK-CANDY MINE — 10,000 FEET DEEP, it said on one. 
  
COKERNUT-ICE SKATING RINKS, it said on another. 
  
Then . . . STRAWBERRY-JUICE WATER PISTOLS. 
  
TOFFEE-APPLE TREES FOR PLANTING OUT IN YOUR GARDEN — ALL SIZES. 
 
EXPLODING SWEETS FOR YOUR ENEMIES. 
  
LUMINOUS LOLLIES FOR EATING IN BED AT NIGHT. 
  
MINT JUJUBES FOR THE BOY NEXT DOOR — THEY'LL GIVE HIM GREEN TEETH FOR A MONTH. 
  
CAVITY-FILLING CARAMELS — NO MORE DENTISTS. 
  
STICKJAW FOR TALKATIVE PARENTS. 
  
WRIGGLE-SWEETS THAT WRIGGLE DELIGHTFULLY IN YOUR TUMMY AFTER SWALLOWING. 
  

'But there's nothing to see,' said Mike Teavee. 
'Choose a button!' said Mr Wonka. 'The two children may press one button each. So take 

'Fantastic!' murmured Grandpa Joe. His eyes were shining with excitement as he stared at 

'The  whole  lift  is  made  of  thick,  clear  glass!'  Mr  Wonka  declared.  'Walls,  doors,  ceiling, 

Quickly, Charlie started reading some of the labels alongside the buttons. 

INVISIBLE CHOCOLATE BARS FOR EATING IN CLASS. 
  
SUGAR-COATED PENCILS FOR SUCKING. 
  
FIZZY LEMONADE SWIMMING POOLS. 
  
MAGIC HAND-FUDGE — WHEN YOU HOLD IT IN YOUR HAND, YOU TASTE IT IN YOUR MOUTH. 
  
RAINBOW DROPS — SUCK THEM AND YOU CAN SPIT IN SIX DIFFERENT COLOURS. 
  
  

A machine with white powder spraying out of it like a snowstorm . . . 
A lake of hot caramel with steam coming off it . . . 
A  village  of  Oompa-Loompas,  with  tiny  houses  and  streets  and  hundreds  of  Oompa-

Loompa children no more than four inches high playing in the streets . . . 
  
And now the lift began flattening out again, but it seemed to be going faster than ever, and 
Charlie could hear the scream of the wind outside as it hurtled forward . . . and it twisted . . . and 
it turned . . . and it went up . . . and it went down . . . and . . . 
  
  
  
  

'I'm going to be sick!' yelled Mrs Teavee, turning green in the face. 
'Please don't be sick,' said Mr Wonka. 
'Try and stop me!' said Mrs Teavee. 
'Then you'd better take this,' said Mr Wonka, and he swept his magnificent black top hat off 

'Help!' shouted Mrs Teavee. 
'Take  my  hand,  madam,'  said  Mr  Wonka  gallantly.  'There  you  are!  Now  grab  this  strap! 

'Come on, come on!' cried Mr Wonka. 'We can't wait all day!' 
'Isn't there a Television Room in all this lot?' asked Mike Teavee. 
  
'Certainly there's a television room,' Mr Wonka said. 'That button over there.' He pointed 
with  his  finger.  Everybody  looked.  TELEVISION  CHOCOLATE,  it  said  on  the  tiny  label  beside  the 
button. 
  
'Whoopee!' shouted Mike Teavee. 'That's for me!' He stuck out his thumb and pressed the 
button.  Instantly,  there  was  a  tremendous  whizzing  noise.  The  doors  clanged  shut  and  the  lift 
leaped away as though it had been stung by a wasp. But it leapt sideways! And all the passengers 
(except Mr Wonka, who was holding on to a strap from the ceiling) were flung off their feet on to 
the floor. 
  
'Get up, get up!' cried Mr Wonka, roaring with laughter. But just as they were staggering to 
their feet, the lift changed direction and swerved violently round a corner. And over they went 
once more. 
  
  
Everybody grab a strap. The journey's not over yet!' 
Old  Grandpa  Joe  staggered  to  his  feet  and  caught  hold  of  a  strap.  Little  Charlie,  who 
  
couldn't possibly reach as high as that, put his arms around Grandpa Joe's legs and hung on tight. 
The lift rushed on at the speed of a rocket. Now it was beginning to climb. It was shooting 
up and up and up on a steep slanty course as if it were climbing a very steep hill. Then suddenly, 
as though it had come to the top of the hill and gone over a precipice, it dropped like a stone and 
Charlie felt his tummy coming right up into his throat, and Grandpa Joe shouted, 'Yippee! Here 
we go!' and Mrs Teavee cried out, 'The rope has broken! We're going to crash!' And Mr Wonka 
said, 'Calm yourself, my dear lady,' and patted her comfortingly on the arm. And then Grandpa 
Joe looked down at Charlie who was clinging to his legs, and he said, 'Are you all right, Charlie?' 
Charlie shouted, 'I love it! It's like being on a roller coaster!' And through the glass walls of the lift, 
as  it  rushed  along,  they  caught  sudden  glimpses  of  strange  and  wonderful  things  going  on  in 
some of the other rooms: 
  
  
together for safety) hacking huge hunks of fudge out of its sides . . . 
  
  

An enormous spout with brown sticky stuff oozing out of it on to the floor . . . 
A  great,  craggy  mountain  made  entirely  of  fudge,  with  Oompa-Loompas  (all  roped 

his head, and held it out, upside down, in front of Mrs Teavee's mouth. 
  
  
other lift at this moment.' 
  
  

'What other lift?' screamed Mrs Teavee. 
'The one that goes the opposite way on the same track as this one,' said Mr Wonka. 
'Holy mackerel!' cried Mr Teavee. 'You mean we might have a collision?' 
'I've always been lucky so far,' said Mr Wonka. 
'Now I am going to be sick!' yelled Mrs Teavee. 
'No, no!' said Mr Wonka. 'Not now! We're nearly there! Don't spoil my hat!' 
The next moment, there was a screaming of brakes, and the lift began to slow down. Then it 

  
  
  
  
stopped altogether. 
'Some ride!' said Mr Teavee, wiping his great sweaty face with a handkerchief. 
  
  
'Never again!' gasped Mrs Teavee. And then the doors of the lift slid open and Mr Wonka 
said, 'Just a minute now! Listen to me! I want everybody to be very careful in this room. There is 
dangerous stuff around in here and you must not tamper with it.' 
  
26 
The Television-Chocolate Room 

'Make this awful thing stop!' ordered Mr Teavee. 
'Can't do that,' said Mr Wonka. 'It won't stop till we get there. I only hope no one's using the 

 
  
The  Teavee  family,  together  with  Charlie  and  Grandpa  Joe,  stepped  out  of  the  lift  into  a 
room  so  dazzlingly  bright  and  dazzlingly  white  that  they  screwed  up  their  eyes  in  pain  and 
stopped walking. Mr Wonka handed each of them a pair of dark glasses and said, 'Put these on 
quick! And don't take them off in here whatever you do! This light could blind you!' 
  
As soon as Charlie had his dark glasses on, he was able to look around him in comfort. He 
saw  a  long  narrow  room.  The  room  was  painted  white  all  over.  Even  the  floor  was  white,  and 
there wasn't a speck of dust anywhere. From the ceiling, huge lamps hung down and bathed the 
room in a brilliant blue-white light. The room was completely bare except at the far ends. At one 
of these ends there was an enormous camera on wheels, and a whole army of Oompa-Loompas 
was clustering around it, oiling its joints and adjusting its knobs and polishing its great glass lens. 
The Oompa-Loompas were all dressed in the most extraordinary way. They were wearing bright-
red space suits, complete with helmets and goggles — at least they looked like space suits — and 
they  were  working  in  complete  silence.  Watching  them,  Charlie  experienced  a  queer  sense  of 
danger.  There  was  something  dangerous  about  this  whole  business,  and  the  Oompa-Loompas 
knew it. There was no chattering or singing among them here, and they moved about over the 
huge black camera slowly and carefully in their scarlet space suits. 
  
At  the  other  end  of  the  room,  about  fifty  paces  away  from  the  camera,  a  single  Oompa-
Loompa (also wearing a space suit) was sitting at a black table gazing at the screen of a very large 
television set. 
  
Room for my very latest and greatest invention — Television Chocolate!' 
'But what is Television Chocolate?' asked Mike Teavee. 
  
  
'Good heavens, child, stop interrupting me!' said Mr Wonka. 'It works by television. I don't 
like television myself. I suppose it's all right in small doses, but children never seem to be able to 
take it in small doses. They want to sit there all day long staring and staring at the screen . . .' 
'That's me!' said Mike Teavee. 
  
'Shut up!' said Mr Teavee. 
  
  
'Thank you,' said Mr Wonka. 'I shall now tell you how this amazing television set of mine 
works. But first of all, do you know how ordinary television works? It is very simple. At one end, 
where  the  picture  is  being  taken,  you  have  a  large  ciné  camera  and  you  start  photographing 
something. The photographs are then split up into millions of tiny little pieces which are so small 

'Here we go!' cried Mr Wonka, hopping up and down with excitement. 'This is the Testing 

'That isn't exactly how it works,' Mike Teavee said. 
'I  am  a  little  deaf  in  my  left  ear,'  Mr  Wonka  said.  'You  must  forgive  me  if  I  don't  hear 

that you can't see them, and these little pieces are shot out into the sky by electricity. In the sky, 
they  go  whizzing  around  all  over  the  place  until  suddenly  they  hit  the  antenna  on  the  roof  of 
somebody's  house.  They  then  go  flashing  down  the  wire  that  leads  right  into  the  back  of  the 
television set, and in there they get jiggled and joggled around until at last every single one of 
those millions of tiny pieces is fitted back into its right place (just like a jigsaw puzzle), and presto! 
— the photograph appears on the screen . . .' 
  
  
everything you say.' 
'I said, that isn't exactly how it works!' shouted Mike Teavee. 
  
  
'You're a nice boy,' Mr Wonka said, 'but you talk too much. Now then! The very first time I 
saw ordinary television working, I was struck by a tremendous idea. "Look here!" I shouted. "If 
these  people  can  break  up  a  photograph  into  millions  of  pieces  and  send  the  pieces  whizzing 
through the air and then put them together again at the other end, why can't I do the same thing 
with a bar of chocolate? Why can't I send a real bar of chocolate whizzing through the air in tiny 
pieces and then put the pieces together at the other end, all ready to be eaten?"' 
'Impossible!' said Mike Teavee. 
  
  
'You think so?' cried Mr Wonka. 'Well, watch this! I shall now send a bar of my very best 
chocolate from one end of this room to the other — by television! Get ready, there! Bring in the 
chocolate!' 
  
Immediately, six Oompa-Loompas marched forward carrying on their shoulders the most 
enormous bar of chocolate Charlie had ever seen. It was about the size of the mattress he slept on 
at home. 

'It  has  to  be  big,'  Mr  Wonka  explained,  'because  whenever  you  send  something  by 
television,  it  always  comes  out  much  smaller  than  it  was  when  it  went  in.  Even  with  ordinary 
television, when you photograph a big man, he never comes out on your screen any taller than a 
pencil,  does  he?  Here  we  go,  then!  Get  ready!  No,  no!  Stop!  Hold  everything!  You  there!  Mike 
Teavee! Stand back! You're too close to the camera! There are dangerous rays coming out of that 
thing! They could break you up into a million tiny pieces in one second! That's why the Oompa-
Loompas  are  wearing  space  suits!  The  suits  protect  them!  All  right!  That's  better!  Now,  then! 
Switch on!' 
  
  
  
  
thin air! 
  
'It's on its way!' cried Mr Wonka. 'It is now rushing through the air above our heads in a 
million tiny pieces. Quick! Come over here!' He dashed over to the other end of the room where 
the large television set was standing, and the others followed him. 'Watch the screen!' he cried. 
'Here it comes! Look!' 

One of the Oompa-Loompas caught hold of a large switch and pulled it down. 
There was a blinding flash. 
'The chocolate's gone!' shouted Grandpa Joe, waving his arms. 
He was quite right! The whole enormous bar of chocolate had disappeared completely into 

The screen flickered and lit up. Then suddenly,  a  small  bar  of  chocolate  appeared  in  the 

'Eat it!' shouted Mr Wonka. 'Go on and eat it! It'll be delicious! It's the same bar! It's got 

'Take it!' shouted Mr Wonka, growing more and more excited. 
'How  can  you  take  it?'  asked  Mike  Teavee,  laughing.  'It's  just  a  picture  on  a  television 

middle of the screen. 
  
  
screen!' 
  
  
chocolate came away in his fingers. He was so surprised he nearly dropped it. 
  
smaller on the journey, that's all!' 
  

'It's absolutely fantastic!' gasped Grandpa Joe. 'It's . . . it's . . . it's a miracle!' 

'Charlie Bucket!' cried Mr Wonka. 'You take it! Reach out and grab it!' 
Charlie put out his hand and touched the screen, and suddenly, miraculously, the bar of 

  
'Just  imagine,'  cried  Mr  Wonka,  'when  I  start  using  this  across  the  country  .  .  .  you'll  be 
sitting at home watching television and suddenly a commercial will flash on to the screen and a 
voice will say, "EAT WONKA'S CHOCOLATES! THEY'RE THE BEST IN THE WORLD! IF YOU 
DON'T BELIEVE US, TRY ONE FOR YOURSELF — NOW!" And you simply reach out and take 
one! How about that, eh?' 
  
  
27 
Mike Teavee is Sent by Television 

'Terrific!' cried Grandpa Joe. 'It will change the world!' 

'But  could  you  send  it  by  television  if  you  wanted  to,  as  you  do  chocolate?'  asked  Mike 

 
  
Mike Teavee was even more excited than Grandpa Joe at seeing a bar of chocolate being 
sent by television. 'But Mr Wonka,' he shouted, 'can you send other things through the air in the 
same way? Breakfast cereal, for instance?' 
  
'Oh, my sainted aunt!' cried Mr Wonka. 'Don't mention that disgusting stuff in front of me! 
Do you know what breakfast cereal is made of? It's made of all those little curly wooden shavings 
you find in pencil sharpeners!' 
  
Teavee. 
  
  
place to another in the same way?' 
  

'Of course I could!' 
'And what about people?' asked Mike Teavee. 'Could you send a real live person from one 

'A person!' cried Mr Wonka. 'Are you off your rocker?' 
'But could it be done?' 
  
'Good heavens, child, I really don't know . . . I suppose it could . . . yes. I'm pretty sure it 
could . . . of course it could . . . I wouldn't like to risk it, though . . . it might have some very nasty 
results . . .' 
  
But Mike Teavee was already off and running. The moment he heard Mr Wonka saying, 
'I'm pretty sure it could . . . of course it could,' he turned away and started running as fast as he 
could towards the other end of the room where the great camera was standing. 'Look at me!' he 
shouted as he ran. 'I'm going to be the first person in the world to be sent by television!' 
'No, no, no, no!' cried Mr Wonka. 
  
'Mike!' screamed Mrs Teavee. 'Stop! Come back! You'll be turned into a million tiny pieces!' 
  
But  there  was  no  stopping  Mike  Teavee  now.  The  crazy  boy  rushed  on,  and  when  he 
  
reached  the  enormous  camera,  he  jumped  straight  for  the  switch,  scattering  Oompa-Loompas 
right and left as he went. 
  
leaped out into the full glare of the mighty lens. 
  

There was a blinding flash. 
Then there was silence. 
Then Mrs Teavee ran forward . . . but she stopped dead in the middle of the room . . . and 
  
she stood there . . . she stood staring at the place where her son had been . . . and her great red 
mouth opened wide and she screamed, 'He's gone! He's gone!' 
  
'Great heavens, he has gone!' shouted Mr Teavee. 
  
Mr Wonka hurried forward and placed a hand gently on Mrs Teavee's shoulder. 'We shall 
have to hope for the best,' he said. 'We must pray that your little boy will come out unharmed at 
the other end.' 
  
  
million tiny pieces!' 
  
  

'Mike!' screamed Mrs Teavee, clasping her head in her hands. 'Where are you?' 
'I'll  tell  you  where  he  is,'  said  Mr  Teavee,  'he's  whizzing  around  above  our  heads  in  a 

'Don't talk about it!' wailed Mrs Teavee. 
'We must watch the television set,' said Mr Wonka. 'He may come through any moment.' 

'See you later, alligator!' he shouted, and he pulled down the switch, and as he did so, he 

Mr and Mrs Teavee and Grandpa Joe and little Charlie and Mr Wonka all gathered round 

  
the television and stared tensely at the screen. The screen was quite blank. 

'Oh, Mr Wonka,' wailed Mrs Teavee, 'how can we make him grow?' 

Mrs Teavee let out a scream of horror. 'You mean only a half of Mike is coming back to us?' 

'He's taking a heck of a long time to come across,' said Mr Teavee, wiping his brow. 
'Oh dear, oh dear,' said Mr Wonka, 'I do hope that no part of him gets left behind.' 
  
'What on earth do you mean?' asked Mr Teavee sharply. 
  
  
'I don't wish to alarm you,' said Mr Wonka, 'but it does sometimes happen that only about 
half the little pieces find their way into the television set. It happened last week. I don't know why, 
but the result was that only half a bar of chocolate came through.' 
  
she cried. 
  
  
  
  
  

'Let's hope it's the top half,' said Mr Teavee. 
'Hold everything!' said Mr Wonka. 'Watch the screen! Something's happening!' 
The screen had suddenly begun to flicker. 
Then some wavy lines appeared. 
Mr Wonka adjusted one of the knobs and the wavy lines went away. 
And now, very slowly, the screen began to get brighter and brighter. 
  
'Here he comes!' yelled Mr Wonka. 'Yes, that's him all right!' 
  
'Is he all in one piece?' cried Mrs Teavee. 
  
'I'm not sure,' said Mr Wonka. 'It's too early to tell.' 
  
Faintly at first, but becoming clearer and clearer every second, the picture of Mike Teavee 
appeared on the screen. He was standing up and waving at the audience and grinning from ear to 
ear. 
  
  
  
  
  
'Hi, Mum!' it said. 'Hi, Pop! Look at me! I'm the first person ever to be sent by television!' 
  

'But he's a midget!' shouted Mr Teavee. 
'Mike,' cried Mrs Teavee, 'are you all right? Are there any bits of you missing?' 
'Isn't he going to get any bigger?' shouted Mr Teavee. 
'Talk to me, Mike!' cried Mrs Teavee. 'Say something! Tell me you're all right!' 
A tiny little voice, no louder than the squeaking of a mouse, came out of the television set. 

'Grab him!' ordered Mr Wonka. 'Quick!' 
Mrs Teavee shot out a hand and picked the tiny figure of Mike Teavee out of the screen. 
'Hooray!' cried Mr Wonka. 'He's all in one piece! He's completely unharmed!' 
'You call that unharmed?' snapped Mrs Teavee, peering at the little speck of a boy who was 

He was certainly not more than an inch tall. 
'He's shrunk!' said Mr Teavee. 
'Of course he's shrunk,' said Mr Wonka. 'What did you expect?' 
'This is terrible!' wailed Mrs Teavee. 'What are we going to do?' 
And Mr Teavee said, 'We can't send him back to school like this! He'll get trodden on! He'll 

  
  
now running to and fro across the palm of her hand, waving his pistols in the air. 
  
  
  
  
  
get squashed!' 
  
  
  
moment we get home. I've had enough of television!' 
  
When he heard this, Mike Teavee flew into a terrible tantrum. He started jumping up and 
down on the palm of his mother's hand, screaming and yelling and trying to bite her fingers. 'I 
want to watch television!' he squeaked. 'I want to watch television! I want to watch television! I 
want to watch television!' 
  
'Here! Give him to me!' said Mr Teavee, and he took the tiny boy and shoved him into the 
breast pocket of his jacket and stuffed a handkerchief on top. Squeals and yells came from inside 
the pocket, and the pocket shook as the furious little prisoner fought to get out. 
  

'He won't be able to do anything!' cried Mrs Teavee. 
'Oh, yes I will!' squeaked the tiny voice of Mike Teavee. 'I'll still be able to watch television!' 
'Never again!' shouted Mr Teavee. 'I'm throwing the television set right out the window the 

  
'Well,' said Mr Wonka, stroking his beard and gazing thoughtfully at the ceiling, 'I must say 
that's a wee bit tricky. But small boys are extremely springy and elastic. They stretch like mad. So 
what we'll do, we'll put him in a special machine I have for testing the stretchiness of chewing-
gum! Maybe that will bring him back to what he was.' 
  
  
  

'Oh, thank you!' said Mrs Teavee. 
'Don't mention it, dear lady.' 
'How far d'you think he'll stretch?' asked Mr Teavee. 
'Maybe miles,' said Mr Wonka. 'Who knows? But he's going to be awfully thin. Everything 

gets thinner when you stretch it.' 
'You mean like chewing-gum?' asked Mr Teavee. 
  
'Exactly.' 
  
'How thin will he be?' asked Mrs Teavee anxiously. 
  
'I haven't the foggiest idea,' said Mr Wonka. 'And it doesn't really matter, anyway, because 
  
we'll soon fatten him up again. All we'll have to do is give him a triple overdose of my wonderful 
Supervitamin  Chocolate.  Supervitamin  Chocolate  contains  huge  amounts  of  vitamin  A  and 
vitamin  B.  It  also  contains  vitamin  C,  vitamin  D,  vitamin  E,  vitamin  F,  vitamin  G,  vitamin  I, 
vitamin J, vitamin K, vitamin L, vitamin M, vitamin N, vitamin O, vitamin P, vitamin Q, vitamin 
R,  vitamin  T,  vitamin  U,  vitamin  V,  vitamin  W,  vitamin  X,  vitamin  Y,  and,  believe  it  or  not, 
vitamin Z! The only two vitamins it doesn't have in it are vitamin S, because it makes you sick, 
and vitamin H, because it makes you grow horns on the top of your head, like a bull. But it does 
have  in  it  a  very  small  amount  of  the  rarest  and  most  magical  vitamin  of  them  all  —  vitamin 
Wonka.' 
  
  

'And what will that do to him?' asked Mr Teavee anxiously. 
'It'll make his toes grow out until they're as long as his fingers . . .' 
'Oh, no!' cried Mrs Teavee. 
'Don't be silly,' said Mr Wonka. 'It's most useful. He'll be able to play the piano with his 

At the end of the room, the Oompa-Loompas around the giant camera were already beating 

  
feet.' 
'But Mr Wonka . . .' 
  
  
'No arguments, please!' said Mr Wonka. He turned away and clicked his fingers three times 
in the air. An Oompa-Loompa appeared immediately and stood beside him. 'Follow these orders,' 
said  Mr  Wonka,  handing  the  Oompa-Loompa  a  piece  of  paper  on  which  he  had  written  full 
instructions.  'And  you'll  find  the  boy  in  his  father's  pocket.  Off  you  go!  Good-bye,  Mr  Teavee! 
Good-bye,  Mrs  Teavee!  And  please  don't  look  so  worried!  They  all  come  out  in  the  wash,  you 
know; every one of them . . .' 
  
their tiny drums and beginning to jog up and down to the rhythm. 
'There they go again!' said Mr Wonka. 'I'm afraid you can't stop them singing.' 
  
  
Little Charlie caught Grandpa Joe's hand, and the two of them stood beside Mr Wonka in 
the middle of the long bright room, listening to the Oompa-Loompas. And this is what they sang: 
 
'The most important thing we've learned, 
So far as children are concerned, 
Is never, NEVER, NEVER let 
Them near your television set — 
Or better still, just don't install 
The idiotic thing at all. 
In almost every house we've been, 
We've watched them gaping at the screen. 
They loll and slop and lounge about, 
And stare until their eyes pop out. 
(Last week in someone's place we saw 

A dozen eyeballs on the floor.) 
They sit and stare and stare and sit 
Until they're hypnotized by it, 
Until they're absolutely drunk 
With all that shocking ghastly junk. 
Oh yes, we know it keeps them still, 
They don't climb out the window sill, 
They never fight or kick or punch, 
They leave you free to cook the lunch 
And wash the dishes in the sink — 
But did you ever stop to think, 
To wonder just exactly what 
This does to your beloved tot? 
IT ROTS THE SENSES IN THE HEAD! 
IT KILLS IMAGINATION DEAD! 
IT CLOGS AND CLUTTERS UP THE MIND! 
IT MAKES A CHILD SO DULL AND BLIND 
HE CAN NO LONGER UNDERSTAND 
A FANTASY, A FAIRYLAND! 
HIS BRAIN BECOMES AS SOFT AS CHEESE! 
HIS POWERS OF THINKING RUST AND FREEZE! 
HE CANNOT THINK — HE ONLY SEES! 
"All right!" you'll cry. "All right!" you'll say, 
"But if we take the set away, 
What shall we do to entertain 
Our darling children! Please explain!" 
We'll answer this by asking you, 
"What used the darling ones to do? 
How used they keep themselves contented 
Before this monster was invented?" 
Have you forgotten? Don't you know? 
We'll say it very loud and slow: 
THEY . . . USED TO . . . READ! They'd READ and READ, 
AND READ and READ, and then proceed 
TO READ some more. Great Scott! Gadzooks! 
One half their lives was reading books! 
The nursery shelves held books galore! 
Books cluttered up the nursery floor! 
And in the bedroom, by the bed, 
More books were waiting to be read! 
Such wondrous, fine, fantastic tales 
Of dragons, gypsies, queens, and whales 
And treasure isles, and distant shores 
Where smugglers rowed with muffled oars, 
And pirates wearing purple pants, 
And sailing ships and elephants, 
And cannibals crouching round the pot, 
Stirring away at something hot. 
(It smells so good, what can it be? 
Good gracious, it's Penelope.) 
The younger ones had Beatrix Potter 

With Mr Tod, the dirty rotter, 
And Squirrel Nutkin, Pigling Bland, 
And Mrs Tiggy-Winkle and — 
Just How The Camel Got His Hump, 
And How The Monkey Lost His Rump, 
And Mr Toad, and bless my soul, 
There's Mr Rat and Mr Mole — 
Oh, books, what books they used to know, 
Those children living long ago! 
So please, oh please, we beg, we pray, 
Go throw your TV set away, 
And in its place you can install 
A lovely bookshelf on the wall. 
Then fill the shelves with lots of books, 
Ignoring all the dirty looks, 
The screams and yells, the bites and kicks, 
And children hitting you with sticks — 
Fear not, because we promise you 
That, in about a week or two 
Of having nothing else to do, 
They'll now begin to feel the need 
Of having something good to read. 
And once they start — oh boy, oh boy! 
You watch the slowly growing joy 
That fills their hearts. They'll grow so keen 
They'll wonder what they'd ever seen 
In that ridiculous machine, 
That nauseating, foul, unclean. 
Repulsive television screen! 
And later, each and every kid 
Will love you more for what you did. 
P.S. Regarding Mike Teavee, 
We very much regret that we 
Shall simply have to wait and see 
If we can get him back his height. 
But if we can't — it serves him right.' 
  
28 
Only Charlie Left 
 
  
'Come on! Hurry up! We must get going! And how many children are there left now?' 
  

'Which room shall it be next?' said Mr Wonka as he turned away and darted into the lift. 

Little Charlie looked at Grandpa Joe, and Grandpa Joe looked back at little Charlie. 
'But Mr Wonka,' Grandpa Joe called after him, 'there's . . . there's only Charlie left now.' 
Mr Wonka swung round and stared at Charlie. 
  
There was a silence. Charlie stood there holding tightly on to Grandpa Joe's hand. 
  
'You mean you're the only one left?' Mr Wonka said, pretending to be surprised. 
  
'Why, yes,' whispered Charlie. 'Yes.' 
  
  
Mr Wonka suddenly exploded with excitement. 'But my dear boy,' he cried out, 'that means 
you've won!' He rushed out of the lift and started shaking Charlie's hand so furiously it nearly 
came off. 'Oh, I do congratulate you!' he cried. 'I really do! I'm absolutely delighted! It couldn't be 

better!  How  wonderful  this  is!  I  had  a  hunch,  you  know,  right  from  the  beginning,  that  it  was 
going to be you! Well done, Charlie, well done! This is terrific! Now the fun is really going to start! 
But we mustn't dilly! We mustn't dally! There's even less time to lose now than there was before! 
We have an enormous number of things to do before the day is out! Just think of the arrangements 
that have to be made! And the people we have to fetch! But luckily for us, we have the great glass 
lift to speed things up! Jump in, my dear Charlie, jump in! You too, Grandpa Joe, sir! No, no, after 
you!  That's  the  way!  Now  then!  This  time  I  shall  choose  the  button  we  are  going  to  press!'  Mr 
Wonka's bright twinkling blue eyes rested for a moment on Charlie's face. 
  
Something  crazy  is  going  to  happen  now,  Charlie  thought.  But  he  wasn't  frightened.  He 
wasn't even nervous. He was just terrifically excited. And so was Grandpa Joe. The old man's face 
was shining with excitement as he watched every move that Mr Wonka made. Mr Wonka was 
reaching for a button high up on the glass ceiling of the lift. Charlie and Grandpa Joe both craned 
their necks to read what it said on the little label beside the button. 
It said . . . UP AND OUT. 
  
'Up and out,' thought Charlie. 'What sort of a room is that?' 
  
Mr Wonka pressed the button. 
  
The glass doors closed. 
  
'Hold on!' cried Mr Wonka. 
  
  
Then WHAM! The lift shot straight up like a rocket! 'Yippee!' shouted Grandpa Joe. Charlie 
was clinging to Grandpa Joe's legs and Mr Wonka was holding on to a strap from the ceiling, and 
up they went, up, up, up, straight up this time, with no twistings or turnings, and Charlie could 
hear the whistling of the air outside as the lift went faster and faster. 'Yippee!' shouted Grandpa 
Joe again. 'Yippee! Here we go!' 

'Faster!' cried Mr Wonka, banging the wall of the lift with his hand. 'Faster! Faster! If we 

'I  suppose  it  might,'  said  Mr  Wonka,  cheerful  as  ever,  'but  it's  pretty  thick  glass,  all  the 

'But you don't mean . . .' shouted Grandpa Joe, '. . . you don't really mean that this lift . . .' 
'Oh yes, I do!' answered Mr Wonka. 'You wait and see! Up and out!' 
'But . . . but . . . but . . . it's made of glass!' shouted Grandpa Joe. 'It'll break into a million 

don't go any faster than this, we shall never get through!' 
  
'Through what?' shouted Grandpa Joe. 'What have we got to get through?' 
  
'Ah-ha!' cried Mr Wonka, 'you wait and see! I've been longing to press this button for years! 
But I've never done it until now! I was tempted many times! Oh, yes, I was tempted! But I couldn't 
bear the thought of making a great big hole in the roof of the factory! Here we go, boys! Up and 
out!' 
  
  
  
pieces!' 
  
same.' 
The lift rushed on, going up and up and up, faster and faster and faster . . . 
  
  
Then  suddenly,  CRASH!  —  and  the  most  tremendous  noise  of  splintering  wood  and 
broken tiles came from directly above their heads, and Grandpa Joe shouted, 'Help! It's the end! 
We're done for!' and Mr Wonka said, 'No, we're not! We're through! We're out!' Sure enough, the 
lift had shot right up through the roof of the factory and was now rising into the sky like a rocket, 
and the sunshine was pouring in through the glass roof. In five seconds they were a thousand feet 
up in the sky. 
'The lift's gone mad!' shouted Grandpa Joe. 
  
  
'Have no fear, my dear sir,' said Mr Wonka calmly, and he pressed another button. The lift 
stopped. It stopped and hung in mid-air, hovering like a helicopter, hovering over the factory and 
over the very town itself which lay spread out below them like a picture postcard! Looking down 
through the glass floor on which he was standing, Charlie could see the small far-away houses 
and  the  streets  and  the  snow  that  lay  thickly  over  everything.  It  was  an  eerie  and  frightening 
feeling to be standing on clear glass high up in the sky. It made you feel that you weren't standing 
on anything at all. 

Looking  down  now,  Charlie  could  see  the  children  and  their  parents  standing  in  a  little 

'Are we all right?' cried Grandpa Joe. 'How does this thing stay up?' 
'Sugar  power!'  said  Mr  Wonka.  'One  million  sugar  power!  Oh,  look,'  he  cried,  pointing 

  
  
down, 'there go the other children! They're returning home!' 
 
29 
The Other Children Go Home 
 
  
'We must go down and take a look at our little friends before we do anything else,' said Mr 
Wonka. He pressed a different button, and the lift dropped lower, and soon it was hovering just 
above the entrance gates to the factory. 
  
group just inside the gates. 
  
  
trucks?' Mr Wonka pointed to a line of gigantic covered vans parked in a line near by. 
  
'Yes,' Charlie said. 'What are they for?' 
  
'Don't  you  remember  what  it  said  on  the Golden  Tickets?  Every  child  goes  home  with  a 
lifetime's supply of sweets. There's one truckload for each of them, loaded to the brim. Ah-ha,' Mr 
Wonka went on, 'there goes our friend Augustus Gloop! D'you see him? He's getting into the first 
truck with his mother and father!' 
  
pipe?' 
  

'I can only see three,' he said. 'Who's missing?' 
'I expect it's Mike Teavee,' Mr Wonka said. 'But he'll be coming along soon. Do you see the 

'You mean he's really all right?' asked Charlie, astonished. 'Even after going up that awful 

'He's very much all right,' said Mr Wonka. 
'He's changed!' said Grandpa Joe, peering down through the glass wall of the elevator. 'He 

'And here comes Mike Teavee!' said Grandpa Joe. 'Good heavens! What have they done to 

'But she's purple in the face!' cried Grandpa Joe. 
'So she is,' said Mr Wonka. 'Ah, well, there's nothing we can do about that.' 
'Good gracious!' cried Charlie. 'Look at poor Veruca Salt and Mr Salt and Mrs Salt! They're 

used to be fat! Now he's thin as a straw!' 
  
'Of course he's changed,' said Mr Wonka, laughing. 'He got squeezed in the pipe. Don't you 
remember?  And  look!  There  goes  Miss  Violet  Beauregarde,  the  great  gum-chewer!  It  seems  as 
though  they  managed  to  de-juice  her  after  all.  I'm  so  glad.  And  how  healthy  she  looks!  Much 
better than before!' 
  
  
  
simply covered with rubbish!' 
  
him? He's about ten feet tall and thin as a wire!' 
  
careless.' 
'But how dreadful for him!' cried Charlie. 
  
  
'Nonsense,' said Mr Wonka, 'he's very lucky. Every basketball team in the country will be 
trying to get him. But now,' he added, 'it is time we left these four silly children. I have something 
very important to talk to you about, my dear Charlie.' Mr Wonka pressed another button, and the 
lift swung upwards into the sky. 
  
30 
Charlie's Chocolate Factory 

'They've  overstretched  him  on  the  gum-stretching  machine,'  said  Mr  Wonka.  'How  very 

 
The great glass lift was now hovering high over the town. Inside the lift stood Mr Wonka, 

  
Grandpa Joe, and little Charlie. 
  
'How I love my chocolate factory,' said Mr Wonka, gazing down. Then he paused, and he 
turned around and looked at Charlie with a most serious expression on his face. 'Do you love it 
too, Charlie?' he asked. 

'Oh, yes,' cried Charlie, 'I think it's the most wonderful place in the whole world!' 
  
  
'I am very pleased to hear you say that,' said Mr Wonka, looking more serious than ever. 
He went on staring at Charlie. 'Yes,' he said, 'I am very pleased indeed to hear you say that. And 
now I shall tell you why.' Mr Wonka cocked his head to one side and all at once the tiny twinkling 
wrinkles of a smile appeared around the corners of his eyes, and he said, 'You see, my dear boy, I 
have decided to make you a present of the whole place. As soon as you are old enough to run it, 
the entire factory will become yours.' 

Charlie stared at Mr Wonka. Grandpa Joe opened his mouth to speak, but no words came 

'It's quite true,' Mr Wonka said, smiling broadly now. 'I really am giving it to you. That's all 

out. 
  
right, isn't it?' 
'Giving it to him?' gasped Grandpa Joe. 'You must be joking.' 
  
'I'm not joking, sir. I'm deadly serious.' 
  
'But . . . but . . . why should you want to give your factory to little Charlie?' 
  
  
'Listen,' Mr Wonka said, 'I'm an old man. I'm much older than you think. I can't go on for 
ever. I've got no children of my own, no family at all. So who is going to run the factory when I get 
too  old  to  do  it  myself?  Someone's  got  to  keep  it  going  —  if  only  for  the  sake  of  the  Oompa-
Loompas. Mind you, there are thousands of clever men who would give anything for the chance 
to come in and take over from me, but I don't want that sort of person. I don't want a grown-up 
person at all. A grown-up won't listen to me; he won't learn. He will try to do things his own way 
and not mine. So I have to have a child. I want a good sensible loving child, one to whom I can tell 
all my most precious sweet-making secrets — while I am still alive.' 
  
'So that is why you sent out the Golden Tickets!' cried Charlie. 
'Exactly!' said Mr Wonka. 'I decided to invite five children to the factory, and the one I liked 

'But Mr Wonka,' stammered Grandpa Joe, 'do you really and truly mean that you are giving 

best at the end of the day would be the winner!' 
  
the whole of this enormous factory to little Charlie? After all . . .' 
  
'There's no time for arguments!' cried Mr Wonka. 'We must go at once and fetch the rest of 
the family — Charlie's father and his mother and anyone else that's around! They can all live in 
the factory from now on! They can all help to run it until Charlie is old enough to do it by himself! 
Where do you live, Charlie?' 
  
Charlie peered down through the glass floor at the snow-covered houses that lay below. 
'It's over there,' he said, pointing. 'It's that little cottage right on the edge of the town, the tiny little 
one . . .' 
  
towards Charlie's house. 
  
  
  
George.' 

'I'm afraid my mother won't come with us,' Charlie said sadly. 
'Why ever not?' 
'Because  she  won't  leave  Grandma  Josephine  and  Grandma  Georgina  and  Grandpa 

'I  see  it!'  cried  Mr  Wonka,  and  he  pressed  some  more  buttons  and  the  lift  shot  down 

'But they must come too.' 
'They  can't,'  Charlie  said.  'They're  very  old  and  they  haven't  been  out  of  bed  for  twenty 

  
years.' 
  
room in this lift for a bed.' 
  
  
  
  
  
  

'Then we'll take the bed along as well, with them in it,' said Mr Wonka. 'There's plenty of 

'You couldn't get the bed out of the house,' said Grandpa Joe. 'It won't go through the door.' 
'You mustn't despair!' cried Mr Wonka. 'Nothing is impossible! You watch!' 
The lift was now hovering over the roof of the Buckets' little house. 
'What are you going to do?' cried Charlie. 
'I'm going right on in to fetch them,' said Mr Wonka. 
'How?' asked Grandpa Joe. 

  
  
  

'Through the roof,' said Mr Wonka, pressing another button. 
'No!' shouted Charlie. 
'Stop!' shouted Grandpa Joe. 
CRASH  went  the  lift,  right  down  through  the  roof  of  the  house  into  the  old  people's 
bedroom. Showers of dust and broken tiles and bits of wood and  cockroaches  and  spiders  and 
bricks and cement went raining down on the three old ones who were lying in bed, and each of 
them  thought  that  the  end  of  the  world  was  come.  Grandma  Georgina  fainted,  Grandma 
Josephine dropped her false teeth, Grandpa George put his head under the blanket, and Mr and 
Mrs Bucket came rushing in from the next room. 
'Save us!' cried Grandma Josephine. 
  
'Calm yourself, my darling wife,' said Grandpa Joe, stepping out of the lift. 'It's only us.' 
  
  
'Mother!' cried Charlie, rushing into Mrs Bucket's arms. 'Mother! Mother! Listen to what's 
happened! We're all going back to live in Mr Wonka's factory and we're going to help him to run it 
and he's given it all to me and . . . and . . . and . . . and . . .' 
  
'What are you talking about?' said Mrs Bucket. 
  
'Just look at our house!' cried poor Mr Bucket. 'It's in ruins!' 
  
'My  dear  sir,'  said  Mr  Wonka,  jumping  forward  and  shaking  Mr  Bucket  warmly  by  the 
hand, 'I'm so very glad to meet you. You mustn't worry about your house. From now on, you're 
never going to need it again, anyway.' 

'Who is this crazy man?' screamed Grandma Josephine. 'He could have killed us all.' 
'This,' said Grandpa Joe, 'is Mr Willy Wonka himself.' 
  
  
It took quite a time for Grandpa Joe and Charlie to explain to everyone exactly what had 
been happening to them all day. And even then they all refused to ride back to the factory in the 
lift. 
'I'd rather die in my bed!' shouted Grandma Josephine. 
  
'So would I!' cried Grandma Georgina. 
  
'I refuse to go!' announced Grandpa George. 
  
  
So  Mr  Wonka  and  Grandpa  Joe  and  Charlie,  taking  no  notice  of  their  screams,  simply 
pushed  the  bed  into  the  lift.  They  pushed  Mr  and  Mrs  Bucket  in  after  it.  Then  they  got  in 
themselves. Mr Wonka pressed a button. The doors closed. Grandma Georgina screamed. And the 
lift rose up off the floor and shot through the hole in the roof, out into the open sky. 
  
Charlie climbed on to the bed and tried to calm the three old people who were still petrified 
with  fear.  'Please  don't  be  frightened,'  he  said.  'It's  quite  safe.  And  we're  going  to  the  most 
wonderful place in the world!' 

'Charlie's right,' said Grandpa Joe. 
'Will there be anything to eat when we get there?' asked Grandma Josephine. 'I'm starving! 

'Anything to eat?' cried Charlie laughing. 'Oh, you just wait and see!' 

---=== END OF CHARLIE’S STORY PART 1 ===--- 

Continued on “Charlie and the Great Glass Elevator” 

 

 

  
The whole family is starving!' 
  
  
  
 

 
 

